SSC 2.0 - 104: Examination Part 2  SSC 2.0   Level 1  104: Examination Part 2  [intro music]  The Mystery is in History   [0:00:12]  All right, let's get more into our history. So the mystery is in the history. Let me take a sec -  ond here to comment on the difference between medicine and surgery. So if you went to  med school, or if you know anyone who's been to med school, they get to a crossroads  where they decide if they're gonna go into medicine or surgery. And medicine is your pri -  mary care, internal medicine, pediatrics. So, there's some kind of that crossover a little bit,  like gynecology and OB. That's a surgical and a medical field. So there's a little crossover  there. So those are a little bit more on the medicine, although that was a crossover with  OB-GYN example there. And then the surgical, of course, would be like the orthopedic  surgery, neurosurgery, ear, nose, and throat surgeons, general surgeons, that's surgery.  Okay, what are we as dentists? So some of you are DDSs, Doctor of Dental Surgery. And  then some of you are cool like me and are DMDs. [laughter] Just a joke. Quick aside on  that. When I was going to dental school and decided that we were going to go to Southern  Illinois that has a DMD degree, I actually looked in the phone book back then and found a  dentist with DMD after his name and called the office and said, "Hey, I noticed that Dr.  Blankenship is a DMD and that a lot of dentists are DDSs. What's the difference?"  [0:02:07]  And the receptionist that answered the phone said, "Well, I think that's because Dr.  Blankenship got more medical training during his dental school." I was like, "Oh, sweet. I'm  going to go to a school that gives more medical training." So of course, we know that's not  true, but whatever. Back to my story here. So we are, as dentists, we are surgeons. Sur -  geons in surgery, diagnosis tends to be pretty easy and treatment tends to be hard. That's  a super generality, but in general, the diagnosis is pretty easy. So for example, X-ray  shows broken bone, separated joint, something like that, pretty straightforward. And then  the surgery to make that all better might be very complicated. Okay? Medicine, on the oth -  er hand, the diagnosis is really hard and the treatment is sometimes very easy. So in med -  icine, like if you ever watched that show House or something like that, that was all about  him being a diagnostician, right? So the mystery was in the history. The mystery was in  what was going on, and he would figure out the mystery of the diagnosis and then he  would put him on whatever medication, tweak whatever fluids they were getting, whatever  little thing, and then the patient would be healed, right? That's how medicine works.  [0:03:35]  09/01/25   Page   of 1   15

SSC 2.0 - 104: Examination Part 2  With medicine, it's difficult to diagnose the problem. Once the problem is diagnosed, then  oftentimes it's like, "Here, take this medication. Here, cut out this trigger of your problem.  Get rid of this thing that you're allergic to," whatever it is. And then it's like, oh, Eureka, that  was it, okay? You are a surgeon. You were trained as a surgeon. Now, God bless you for  being here with me right now watching this video because it means you are open to the  idea of understanding more medicine, of opening your mind to diagnosis and spending  time with people in this way. Maybe, frankly, you're a little bit bored of surgery because as  a restorative dentist, you know, the diagnosis isn't the hard part. I know that sometimes  there's some schools of thought out there. When I bring this up, when I lecture to big  groups, I will get, you know, if I ever say, "Hey, what's harder in general dentistry, restora -  tive dentistry, diagnosis or treatment?" I always have at least 80% of the people like, diag -  nosis. And that's because they've been to some, you know, extra training or whatever that  made it about the diagnosis, and that means diagnosing occlusal disease and stuff like  that.  [0:04:54]  But I totally reject that. That is not true. You know it's not true. You come in to a new pa -  tient. The hygienist has already diagnosed everything. They've looked at the X-rays. They  know where there's cavities. They know where there's problems. They've already diag -  nosed periodontal disease or not. It's not rocket science, okay? Now, the treatment, on the  other hand, may be very complicated and there may be stuff that you can't do or maybe  you are super accomplished at this point and there's things that you do every day that I  couldn't even imagine doing. The skills you've created are amazing as a surgeon. I've de -  veloped those same skills as a diagnostician. And so that's why diagnosing TMJ problems  is easy for me is because I've done it so many times. So if you are getting started in this  field, don't despair. That same skill that you have now to do a crown prep, basically with  your eyes closed, or you could cut a crown prep nowadays and not even think about it. So  you're thinking about something else the entire time, your upcoming vacation or the bike  you're going to buy or whatever, and then you get done and you're kind of like, "I didn't  even think about that the whole time and it's perfect." You can do stuff just on autopilot.  Those same type of skills, believe it or not, can come to diagnostics and how to take a his -  tory, what questions to ask, what questions to ask based on their answers to the questions  you already asked, stuff like that. All right? So I go down that to help you understand that  there's a difference between medicine and surgery. You are a surgeon. Now we're going  into the world of medicine.  OPQRST   [0:06:35]  Okay, speaking of medicine, if you've ever been to an emergency room or to most doctors,  but more ER, they're going to ask these questions. This is a medical acronym, OPQRST,  and it's for Onset, Palliative, Provoked, Quality, Region, Scale, or Time. Now, if you give  09/01/25   Page   of 2   15

SSC 2.0 - 104: Examination Part 2  me the OPQRST, so you'll see this on the Facebook group quite a bit, that someone will  be talking about a patient having jaw pain or whatever, and I or someone else in Spencer  Study Club will say, "Okay, what's their OPQRST?" If you give me OPQRST, range of mo -  tion, and if they have reducing disc displacement or not, I can probably tell you what's go -  ing on.   And again, as you go through this, so will you be able to tell what's going on. So  those are kind of things, the OPQRST, range of motion, and the palpation of do they have  a disc displacement or not, that's going to give you a huge percent of the accurate diagno -  sis right there.  Onset   [0:07:36]  Okay, for Onset, what were you doing when it started? How long have you had the prob -  lem? There's a pretty big difference between a 25-year TMJ problem, like I've had a prob -  lem for 25 years, and I bit down on a peanut in a salad last week and my jaw hurts, or I  was playing basketball last week and I got hit in the face and my jaw hurts. Those are very,  very different, treated differently. Chronic pain, chronic problems are going to be longer,  harder to get people better. The etiology that caused the problem is possibly long gone at  this point. So onset, big deal. Okay, when did this all get started and what was going on?  Provocation or Palliation   [0:08:22]  Provocation or Palliation? Okay, first with Provocation, does anything make it worse? And  they may say, "Well, chewing makes it worse or trying to bite a big apple or stress makes it  worse or sleeping makes it worse.” So that one should possibly surprise you, right? That  you're like, "Huh." So the person who says I wake up with jaw pain, you know something's  going on while they sleep because that's weird, right? Now, as a 50 plus year old dude at  this point, [laughter] for those of you who are younger than I am and for those of you that  are in your 40s and beyond, you'll appreciate this. All of a sudden, out of nowhere, you  start having pain when you wake up from sleep. [laughter] Just bizarre, right? Your back  hurts, your hip hurts, your shoulder hurts, your foot hurts, whatever. And it's because of a  posture that we have during sleep or something we're doing during sleep or some blood  flow that we're cutting off to an area or some nerve that we're cutting off to an area while  we sleep. Apparently when you're younger, your body's better at handling that sort of thing,  but as you get older, that can be a problem. Now, with TMJ problems, the first thing that  should come to your mind if the patient's like, "Yeah, I wake up and my jaw's killing me,"  that's where we start thinking about sleep apnea, we start thinking about airway problems,  not necessarily even apnea, but some sort of sleep-related breathing disorder, maybe up -  per area resistance syndrome or something like that.  [0:09:54]  09/01/25   Page   of 3   15

SSC 2.0 - 104: Examination Part 2  So what makes it worse? Just keep in mind there if they say, "Yeah, sleeping makes it  worse." And you might even ask that, "Does sleeping make it better or does sleeping make  it worse?" If they say, "Oh, no, I wake up feeling great," okay, cool. Then we know we've  got more of a daytime issue. It's kind of funny to me too because no dentist ever asks that.  The universal treatment for TMJ problems, as we'll talk about later, is a night guard, right?  That's the universal treatment. But what if you ask that patient, "How do you feel when you  wake up?" "Great." "How's your jaw when you're eating breakfast and stuff like that?" "Su -  per. Yeah, I don't have a problem until later in the day or the evening." Okay, it's still possi -  ble that it could be a nighttime-related problem, but it's less probable. All right, next, what  does make it better? And they may say, "Well, medications make it better." This goes back  a little bit to the Advil migraine discussion. If they say, "Yeah, so medications make it bet -  ter." "Well, what kind?" "Tylenol makes it better versus Advil." So if they say, "Well, yeah,  Tylenol doesn't really seem to help that much, but Advil really does." Well, now you know  it's inflammatory, right? 'Cause Advil's an anti-inflammatory.  [0:11:00]  If they say, "Tylenol seems to help pretty well, but Advil doesn't," well, then maybe it is not  inflammatory because the Tylenol being more of a pain reliever that's working at different  mechanisms. So there can be medications that they can discuss with you that will give you  an idea of what mechanisms are at play there. They may say, "Well, soft diet helps." And  so that means that chewing hurts, right? Or they may say that stress reduction, that relax -  ation helps. All of these things are things that could make it better or palliate.  Quality   [0:11:39]  Next is Quality. Can you describe the pain to me? Is it sharp, stabbing, burning, throbbing,  aching, constant, electrical? All of these qualities of pain will give you information. And  watch for this too, because sometimes the patient will give you not necessarily contradicto -  ry responses, but something that requires a follow-up question. For example, "Well, it's a  constant stabbing pain." And again, in your mind, you'd be kind of like, "Really? Constantly  stabbing?" So if someone actually had a constant stabbing pain, where would they proba -  bly go? Probably to the ER, huh? I would. [laughter] I wouldn't make an appointment with  the TMD person to see them three weeks from now.  [0:12:32]  So you follow up with that and you say, "So constantly stabbing?" Kind of like that. And  they'll be like, "Well, no, it's not constant, but sometimes it's a stabbing pain." "Okay, so not  constant, but when you have the pain, it's a stabbing pain." "Yes, exactly." So watch for all  of these things is to check in the normal or check in the abnormal column. So with muscu -  loskeletal pain, which you've probably had, there's normal, there's abnormal. With tem -  poromandibular disorders, that makes sense and that doesn't make sense. So for exam -  ple, a constant stabbing pain doesn't make sense. So for musculoskeletal pain, which if  09/01/25   Page   of 4   15

SSC 2.0 - 104: Examination Part 2  you've had this before, you'll relate to this or relate with this, you can get yourself in a posi -  tion where it doesn't hurt usually. There might be some throbbing. So if a person said,  "Well, constant throbbing," and it was a very recent injury, all right, we can buy that, right?  If you sprain your ankle, even if you put your ankle up, you're probably still going to have  some throbbing. All right, I'll give you that. But on the other hand, if you have back pain, it's  usually not constant, and then you can find a way that you can sit or lay or move in some  way that you're kind of like, all right, it feels okay right there. So it's not constant. Constant  musculoskeletal pain would be weird. That'd be a check in the weird column. So that's  quality.  Region and Radiation   [0:14:03]  Next, Region and Radiation. So I call this the one finger test, and that is ask the patient to  point with one finger to where it hurts the most, and that will help you kind of narrow things  down. So if they point to the jaw joint, they point to under their cheek, temporal tendon,  point to the back of their head. If they say, "It's kind of behind my eye," all of that from the  anatomy that we talked about before, you can start narrowing stuff down. Whereas if they  just kind of say, "Yeah, it just kind of hurts over here," that's too much anatomy. So we  want them to point with one finger. Now, having said that, it's not uncommon for the patient  to be like, "Well, it kind of hurts everywhere." I get it, or "It kind of hurts all over this area."  "I understand. Where does it hurt the most? Where does it hurt the most? Let's start  there." And then they give you kind of where it hurts the most. Also, does it hurt someplace  and then travel other places? So this would be myofascial pain or trigger points. And they  may say, "Yeah, it kind of hurts my neck and goes up the side of my head." Okay, that kind  of makes sense. "Kind of hurts in here, and I swear it goes into my tooth." Okay, makes  sense. Again, check in the makes sense column.  Severity   [0:15:08]  Next is Severity. Now, if you're not already doing this, if you haven't been a member of  Spencer Study Club for very long, you're probably not doing this. This could change your  life. So this is a way to make subjective pain. So pain, by definition, is subjective. Yes?  Okay, there's no blood test for pain. There's no X-ray for pain. It is subjective, and it varies,  obviously, from individual to individual, but it's all about the perception and them communi -  cating that perception. And for us to make judgment on their perception is not valuable at  all, because how one person reacts to something has nothing to do with how someone  else will react to that same stimulus. Pain is subjective. Pain is their subjection of that  event, of that trauma to their tissues. Okay, severity. Here's how you ask. "On a scale from  zero to 10, where 10 is being burned alive, what is your pain?" Okay, now you may think,  09/01/25   Page   of 5   15

SSC 2.0 - 104: Examination Part 2  okay, that's just Jamison being funny. No, it's not. So this allows you to make subjective  objective, 'cause right now, if you're not doing it this way, what happens? You say, "Hey,  zero to 10," and the patient says "20, 100, 150," okay? Or they at least say, "10. That's a  10, Doc." But they're sitting there talking to you, normal. If you were on a burned alive level  pain, would you just be sitting there having a conversation with somebody about that pain?  No way. [laughter] You're either screaming or you're in a ball on the floor crying.  [0:16:49]  There's no one at a nine or 10 on the pain scale that is having a conversation about their  nine or 10 on the pain scale. Okay, so this will massively change things. Zero is nothing.  10 is being burned alive. And then that will give you a number between zero and 10. And  why that's valuable is you're gonna treat these people for their pain, and you hope that it  gets less. So then every time they come in, "All right, hey, this time you've been in treat -  ment now for a month, or we did those PRF injections three weeks ago, Remember the  scale? Zero is no pain at all, ten is being burned alive. Last time you said you were an  eight. What are you now?" And then they'll tell you. Now we ask this three ways: On aver -  age, at its worst, and at its best. Why three ways? Because people will give you at its  worst. If you say, "What's your pain, zero to 10? 10 is burned alive." They will say "Seven."  And you're like, "Okay, you don't look like you're in a seven right now," and they probably  aren't, but they're going to say, "Yeah, it gets to be this bad." So on average, and let's say  they say, "On average it's a four." "What is it at its worst?" "It gets really bad. I'd say an  eight." And what would you say it is at its best?" "A two."  [0:18:02]  Okay, that last answer, if it's anything other than zero, that requires a follow-up question.  "So you're saying it hurts all the time." And then usually, the vast majority of times, they'll  say, "Well, no, it doesn't hurt all the time." "So there are some times it's a zero?" "Yeah,  there's some times it's a zero." Okay, big check in the normal column. Once again, muscu -  loskeletal pain is rarely always. It's rarely always. So watch for that. On average, at its  worst, at its best. If at its best, is not a zero, follow-up question, 'cause if they say, "Yeah,  you know, it never gets below a three." Okay, that's weird. That's a check in the weird col -  umn. Doesn't mean it's not true. Don't get me wrong. I'm not saying that they're making  stuff up. I'm not saying that's all in their head or whatever. I'm just saying that's a check in  the weird column. Whereas if they say, "No, yeah, actually, you know what, if I do this, this,  and this, if I use an ice pack, if I do this, then I can get it pretty much to a zero." Okay, cool.  Then that's a check in the normal column.  Timing   [0:19:03]  Timing. So timing is when is this bothering them? And the questions you might ask is,  "Does this bother you all the time?" which once we've already discussed, that would be  weird, morning, afternoon, or evening, random. I hate that reply. It's kind of random. I hate  09/01/25   Page   of 6   15

SSC 2.0 - 104: Examination Part 2  random. It's worst. Why? Because it doesn't teach you anything, right? So you mean like  it's more after meals? Well, sometimes. It's more in the mornings? Well, sometimes. It's  more in the afternoon or late evening? Sometimes. Like you wake up with pain when you  sleep? Well, sometimes. It's kind of random. Okay, good luck figuring that out when it's just  completely all over the place like that. So random is also a big check in the weird column  because usually with musculoskeletal pain, it's not random. There's things that if you've  hurt your knee or your back or your shoulder or whatever, you know, "Yeah, putting on my  shirt hurts. Doing this, you know, picking up a bag and walking upstairs, that's going to hurt  my back or running is going to hurt my foot." You know what the behaviors are that are  gonna cause it. You don't usually just be like, "Oh, man, I'll just be like standing around. All  of a sudden my foot will hurt." Weird, right? So that's another check in the weird or the  non-weird column.  [0:20:21]  After meals, when eating. So this one is curious because as I mentioned, we tend to give  people what for their TMJ problems? A night guard, right? So if your patient says, "Yeah, it  mostly hurts when I chew, doc. That's the worst part. It's when I'm eating and I love to eat.  This is really killing me here." And then you're like, "Well, good, here's a night guard." And  they're like, "What the heck does that have to do with anything?" It's kind of like, you know,  if I said, "Yeah, so my elbow hurts when I play tennis." And the doctor's like, "Oh, well,  here's an elbow brace to wear." Be like, "Okay, cool. So I wear that when I play tennis,  right?" "Oh, no, no, no, no, no. No, just wear it to sleep." You would think that was strange,  right?  [0:21:06]  So in Spencer Study Club, you'll learn in level three that we use appliances when people  chew. And that does many things for us, which I'll cover more later. But just in a nutshell, it  changes what they can eat and how they eat and how long it takes them to eat and all  sorts of stuff. It makes them aware of behaviors. So that's one of the big reasons that I will  encourage you to use a day splint when they eat if they say it hurts to eat. Okay, so that's  timing. That's OPQRST. Really get this down, that you know what all of those are.  OPQRST, I encourage you to put that into your electronic medical record, your evaluation,  that you kind of set this up in a way so that you can ask those questions pretty quick or  even better yet, that you have somebody else ask those questions for you and you come  in with the patient and say, "Hey, Jim, go ahead and tell me what you and Sarah have  been talking about for the past 15 minutes." And then your assistant Jim says, "Oh yeah,  well, Sarah said that this started five years ago and it seemed to be related to some dental  work that she had done and it is made better when she takes ibuprofen. It's made worse  when she tries to chew. It's kind of a dull ache most of the time and every once in a while it  can be sharp. It kind of hurts mostly in her jaw joint and then down in her masseter mus -  cle."  [0:22:30]  "On a scale of zero to 10, she said at the average it's about four, at the worst it's about six,  and then if she does certain things it can be zero. And it seems to be bothering her kind of  09/01/25   Page   of 7   15

SSC 2.0 - 104: Examination Part 2  more in the mornings, and then by afternoon or late afternoon it seems to get better."  Okay, see how fast I did that? So that's because my assistant would have been in there  with the patient and got all that information, and that might have taken 10 minutes to get all  of that great history, but then they're able to give it back to me in 30 seconds. Okay, that's  how we do it in our practice. So in our practice we have assistants that take all of the initial  history, and then they come in and just give the bullet to the doctor, and then the doctor  can go straight into. So after hearing that history that the assistant gives, I know what's go -  ing on the vast majority of the time.  [0:23:20]  So we could then quickly go to, all right, what additional questions do I need to ask? What  measurements do I need to take? Whatever, so that we can get on to our diagnosis. I  would strongly encourage you to do that too. However, put in your own reps first. Okay,  you need to be an expert at this first, so you need to do I would say at least a couple  dozen patients where it's all you to kind of get that get that down and understand what to  do, and then that will allow you to train an assistant to come in, be with you in the room  while you're doing that for a few weeks, a few months, however long it takes you to get  through a few dozen patients.  [0:23:55]  That assistant's with you, hearing you over and over, hearing the questions that you ask,  how you ask them, what order you ask them in, and then eventually you can be like,  "Okay, assistant, that's your job now. I'll be with another patient. I'll be doing a crown prep  over in this room. You're working up that TMD patient. I come in. Hey, give me the bullet."  Boom. They tell you what's going on. Okay? All right. That's OPQRST. So let's look at a  little bit of the literature, and like I said, there's gonna be a different section on this in the  level three where we'll go more in depth, but just want to share some of this right now as  you're kind of getting started in this and reinforce to you that I strongly encourage you to  learn how to do this as fast as possible if you don't know already.  Reducing Disc Displacement - 1st Study   [0:24:39]  So this study 2022, pretty cool. So they had 22 patients with one-sided clicking, and they  injected one milliliter of PRF. This is, by the way, as you'll see in a second, there aren't a  lot of studies with PRF. More studies are with PRP 'cause it's been around longer, but we  believe that PRF works better. The main difference between PRF and PRP, PRP has an  anticoagulant in the tubes. PRF does not. So back to the study here. They were individual -  ly injected with one milliliter of PRF twice one week apart into the superior joint space of  the TMJ. Data were recorded and evaluated by the Health Chemo Index. This was con -  ducted three times, then results. The clicking disappeared entirely in 14 out of 20 patients  after one week of getting the first injection. So when they showed up in week two for the  second injection, 14 had already said, "Yep, I'm not clicking anymore." Then, and in all pa -  09/01/25   Page   of 8   15

SSC 2.0 - 104: Examination Part 2  tients after one week of getting the second injection, 20 patients, all unilateral click, all  stopped clicking after the second injection. Then, continuing that sentence, and returned  the clicking to two of them after a six-month. Actually, that's reading exactly, after, it should  say, after six months since the first injection. So out of 20 people, they all get the clicking  to go away. Two, it returns within six months. Now, back to kind of our anatomy discussion  and popping and clicking. I get a little concerned with studies like this 'cause if you think  about it, and I had a little video playing there. Let's see if we can get that to play some  more. Let's see. Let's play that again.  [0:26:37]  [ video playback]  So if they were clicking, click, what would I have to do? I'd have to stop them right about  there to be on the disc, right? So if PRF kept them on the disc all the time, what would you  expect to happen? Let me pause, let you think about that. What happened right there  where I just stopped that video? What is not happening may be a better way to say it.  What would you expect to change? Did you say their occlusion? That's right. So if that pa -  tient went from reducing disc displacement, so here, pop off the disc, on their teeth, click  on the disc, off their teeth, off their teeth, off their teeth, off their teeth, click on their teeth.  So if the PRF alone... And it doesn't say anything here about splint therapy or anything like  that. If the PRF alone caused the disc to be reduced, you'd kind of expect them to have  their bite be a little off, and that's not mentioned in the study. So just be aware of that.  Sometimes I take these things with a grain of salt because unfortunately it's sad to me, but  there are a lot of misunderstanding on how, frankly, how the jaw joint works, but we'll take  that as a positive. Okay, here's another one. More reducing disc displacements. I'll stop  that video here, you don't need to watch it over again. We'll stop it in good spot there.  Reducing Disc Displacement - 2nd Study   [0:28:13]  All right, so this study, 20 patients for a total of 32 joints. So in other words, in 20 patients,  you'd have 40 joints. 32 of the total of 40 joints had a reducing disc displacement. They  split them into two groups. One group received PRP injection, so that's with the anticoagu -  lant in the test tube, and the other group received hydrocortisone with local anesthetic with  arthroscopy. So they put a scope in their joint and kind of, I don't know if they cleaned it  out completely, but hydrocortisone injection with local anesthetic. Both patients and opera -  tor were blinded to the contents of injections. I would still think though that [laughter] they  might recognize if they did arthroscopy, they would recognize that. The patients were as -  sessed for pain, Maximum Interincisal Opening, and TMJ sound. Results, in the group of  PRP injection, pain was markedly reduced than the group of hydrocortisone with local  anesthetic. So PRP wins on the pain versus hydrocortisone. Mouth opening was increased  similarly in both groups, and TMJ sound was experienced lesser in patients who received  PRP. Okay, one more time. Group in PRP, way less pain, similar opening, less sounds.  09/01/25   Page   of 9   15

SSC 2.0 - 104: Examination Part 2  [0:29:36]  So, I believe that in this case that the disc would have been in a better position, like with  the previous study, and one of the reasons that their range of motion improved was be -  cause that disc position improved versus the other group where the disc position almost  for sure did not improve, they were just pushing it farther out of place. Conclusion, injec -  tions of PRP were more effective in reducing the symptoms as compared to hydrocorti -  sone with local anesthetics. Frankly, that study alone, 2018, reason to not do hydrocorti -  sone. So this is one that I would pull out, have this ready to take to your oral surgeon col -  leagues and say, "Hey, what do you think of this study back in 2018 that showed that PRP  was superior to hydrocortisone?"  TMJ Pain   [0:30:28]  All right, next. In this study, they were looking at pain. Here we have the Wilkes Classifica -  tion of internal derangement. Some of you may be familiar with that if you did any study  with the Pankey group or some other kind of schools, occlusion type of schools around the  country. So 48 TMJs in 37 patients, painful internal derangement, Wilkes one through four.  So they could have been anywhere from early reducing disc displacement to non-reducing  disc displacement with crepitus, so basically DJD on stage five.  [0:31:01]  Patients were injected with 1.5 to two CC's of PRF, another PRF study within the superior  joint space at two week intervals this time. Pain and subjective dysfunction were recorded  and they did some statistical analysis. Results, 33 of the 48 TMJs showed significant re -  duction in pain at eight weeks and at three, six and 12 months, fantastic. So 69% of the  patients, significant reduction in pain, quick, and then that stayed at three, six and 12  months. 15 of the 48 TMJs, 31% did not improve, non-responders, interesting. The best  responders to liquid PRF injections were internal derangement stage Wilkes four and five.  Okay, let's go over there to our definitions there. Stage four, non-reducing disc displace -  ment chronic increasing functional disturbance and stage five, non-reducing disc dis -  placement chronic with osteoarthritis, crepitus, scraping, grating, grinding symptoms, pain,  restricted motion, difficult function. So that's all the kind of DJD stuff. So interesting that the  best responders were the ones with the worst joints. Kind of makes sense because they're  still having pain at that point and so giving them that PRF reduced the pain significantly.  Said that four and five, and check that out. So 100% of those with the so-called worst  Wilkes classification had the best response.  [0:32:34]  Comparing that to Wilkes one, 0%. So whoever had the Wilkes one, they didn't do well ac -  cording to their report. Two, 47% and three, 33%. Okay, so we see that this is effective but  that kind of makes sense 'cause if they're looking at pain and dysfunction, those with the  least pain, so stage one, they don't have pain. So no pain or limitation, they just have a  09/01/25   Page   of 10   15

SSC 2.0 - 104: Examination Part 2  click. So it's not terribly surprising that those people would be like, "Yeah, it didn't seem to  help that much." Well, they didn't have much of a problem in the first place. Okay, continu -  ing, a non-significant but notable decrease in dysfunction was found. So cool. Non-signifi -  cant, so that means that it didn't rise the level of significance but there was a decrease in  dysfunction or rather there was an increase in function. Conclusion, preliminary findings  support the liquid PRF exerts long-term interesting analgesic effects in most patients with  painful TMJ-D or TMG internal derangements. That word analgesic is the interesting part  to me. So in other words, pain is better with PRF injections.   Now in our experience, not all  patients show those dramatic changes with their Cone Beam CT that I showed you before,  but pain so far, as I mentioned earlier, they're all getting better with their pain.  PRP + Splint Therapy   [0:34:05]  All right, now what if we combine the power of platelet-rich plasma or fibrin with splint ther -  apy? Well, we would think that that would be better. So the analogy I use with my patients  on this is that this is like crutches. So if we were to give you a shot in your knee, we might  give you crutches to take pressure off of your knee for a while and let the good stuff hap -  pen without having that bearing weight and stuff like that. So in this study, 31 patients, TMJ  osteoarthritis who were treated with splints combined with platelet-rich plasma, January to  June, Visual Analog scores were taken. Results, splint plus PRP treatment was successful  in 31 patients. So note how many patients were in the study, 31. [laughter] So in other  words, every patient in the study was successful. Mean pre-treatment Visual Analog Scale  score was 6.1, so that's zero to 10. So averaging them, they were 6.1 and the mean Visual  Analog Scale score six months post-treatment was 4.1.  [0:35:05]  Now that doesn't seem like, whoa, that's not, doesn't seem like that big of a deal. It kind of  is. Like if you put yourself in that situation of, particularly if you do the zero to 10 the way  I've encouraged you to do, zero is nothing, 10 is being burned alive. You get over five,  that's pretty bad. You get under five and you're like, "Okay, you know, this is something  that still isn't great but I can kind of deal with it." Post-treatment Visual Analog Scale scores  were significantly lower than the preoperative Visual Analog Scale score. Mean pre-treat -  ment maximum comfortable mouth opening is 27.6. That's pretty low, huh? So again, this  is an average or a mean. So we know that there's some outliers on this that probably  screw this up. But that went to 34.8, a seven millimeter increase. That's a pretty big deal.  Conclusion, splint plus PRP is an effective treatment for temporomandibular joint os -  teoarthritis. Now there'd be bunches of studies out there that would show splint therapy  probably helps people similarly but not, it's dang rare that you would have 100% of pa -  tients report improvement. Okay, those are like dental, dentist stats of like what percentage  of your patients do well after you do a filling or something like that.   In the TMD world, we're  09/01/25   Page   of 11   15

SSC 2.0 - 104: Examination Part 2  not really used to that. I've said for years that 80% of our patients get 80% better. Now with  this tool, we're starting to see significantly more success or higher success rates.  Trigger Points   [0:36:44]  All right, what about the trigger points and stuff that we talked about briefly? What would  PRP, PRF do with this? So this study, 50 adult patients participate in the study, randomly  divided into two groups. First group received one millimeter lidocaine injections to the trig -  ger point, like I showed before. Although, they injected a whole milliliter, like I told you, it's  more about the technique of hitting the trigger point than it is about injecting stuff. But this  study, they thought it was about injecting stuff, so they injected one CC of lidocaine. Sec -  ond group of patients received one milliliter of PRF, and the patient's pain was then mea -  sured who did better. Statistically significant difference of pain levels before the procedure  and four weeks after it was found in both groups. There was no statistical significant differ -  ence between groups and pain levels before the procedure and two weeks after it. How -  ever, statistically significant difference was noticed four weeks after the procedure. Four  weeks after the procedure, patient's average pain in lidocaine group was 3.4 on the Visual  Analog Scale, and it was 0.9 in the PRGF group.  [0:37:50]  So again, no real huge difference before, four weeks after the procedure, 3.4 on the Visual  Analog Scale for the lidocaine group, 0.9, less than one in the PRGF group, meaning, and  by the way, PRGF stands for platelet-rich growth factor group. So what that means when  you see a 0.9 and there's basically 25 people in there, that means there was a lot of zeros,  there was a lot of people in that group that had no pain at all. Conclusions, platelet-rich  growth factor injections and masseter muscle effective by myofascial pain syndrome are  an effective treatment method. Platelet-rich growth factor injections more effectively relief  myofascial pain. My gosh, there's a lot of typos in these. Pain and masseter muscle than  lidocaine injections. Now, once again, remember, it's more about that local twitch re -  sponse. Nevertheless, if you were to drop some medication there, I would rather drop, it's  not a medication, but I'd rather drop platelet-rich fibrin or platelet-rich growth factor than I  would lidocaine.  Platelet Rich Plasma and Dry Needling   [0:39:00]  So in this study from 2022, they compared using platelet-rich plasma and dry needling.  Remember my talking about dry needling? That term that physical therapists use. So go  ahead and reading here. Randomized controlled trial included 30 clinically confirmed cas -  es of myofascial trigger points in the masseter muscle, randomly and equally assigned to  either PRP or dry needling. So 15 in each group. Both groups were evaluated for pain with  09/01/25   Page   of 12   15

SSC 2.0 - 104: Examination Part 2  a Visual Analog Scale, range of functional movements, need for pain medication, patient  satisfaction, and sleep. Also with a Visual Analog Scale. At baseline and two weeks, one  month and three month follow ups, Visual Analog Scale pain and Likert score were also  obtained at six month intervals. I haven't mentioned this. So Visual Analog Scale, in case  you're not familiar with this. So you got the like zero to 10, right? It depends on the re -  search, but oftentimes to make it a true Visual Analog Scale, it'll be like 100 millimeters  wide, okay? And it will say zero on one side and it will say 10 on the other side. And then  there's usually nothing in between those two. And then the patient is to mark between zero  is no pain, 10 is the worst you can imagine, or zero usually for sleep would be terrible and  10 would be awesome. And then they mark somewhere along that line. And then, the re -  searcher takes a ruler, 100 millimeter ruler, and sticks it on the Visual Analog Scale. And  that's how they get their number. Okay, so wherever they put the strict mark, then that  might be 67 millimeters on the 100 millimeter scale. And then that would be a 6.7 on the  Visual Analog Scale.  [0:40:53]  Not exactly positive how they did it here, but that is a way to do that, rather than having the  smiley face and the frowny faces and all that kind of stuff. Okay, results. Use of PRP solu -  tion in the masseter trigger points in myofascial pain syndrome patients had a better effect  on pain and patient satisfaction compared to dry needling. Conclusion, PRP appears to be  more effective treatment modality compared to dry needling. So once again, PRP for the  win. So that's kind of an overview of using PRP, PRF, splint therapy in pain, disc displace -  ments, stuff like that. Again, more on this later. Hopefully, you've already seen enough to  be stoked out of your mind about this. If you got into Spencer Study Club because you're  more interested in dental sleep medicine, which is very common, I like to say that dental  sleep medicine is the gateway drug into TMD. [laughter] I kind of hook you in on the sleep  stuff and then I help you realize that actually TMD is really cool. And if you diagnose peo -  ple, you get them better. And now with PRF, you get them better even faster and more  predictably and with less costs. And you're not worrying about having to do ortho and  crown their teeth and stuff like that the way I teach it as well. So I hope that you start help -  ing people with TMJ problems.  TMD Recap   [0:42:20]  But let me recap this section here and bring this to a conclusion. Once again, retrodiscitis,  think tongue depressor test, aqualizer and Advil, trismus, think severely reduced range of  motion after inferior alveolar nerve block, Medrol Dosepak and physical therapy, or what  else could you do? Heck, yeah, PRF right in the same spot. So you would do PRF in the IA  block. You would give them another IA block just like you did before. And if you're hitting  the medial pterygoid, you'd be like, okay, good, I'm pretty sure that's what happened be -  fore. And you would inject some PRF into that medial pterygoid on purpose. So that's what  09/01/25   Page   of 13   15

SSC 2.0 - 104: Examination Part 2  I would do if one of my family members came home and had trismus after a dental proce -  dure, I would not put them on the Medrol Dosepak, I would do PRF and then still give them  physical therapy to stretch that thing out. Non-reducing disc displacement, 26 millimeter  range of motion without clicking, with a history of recent clicking, unlocking procedure or  refer ASAP.  [0:43:25]  I'll cover this more in level three, but to say this right now, as we're recording this, we don't  think it's a great idea to unlock with PRF. We believe it's better to unlock with local anes -  thetic. I'll cover that more later, but this is perhaps a exception to the rule of PRF is awe -  some all the time. Our thought process currently on this is that if we do PRF for an unlock -  ing procedure in the jaw joint and we aren't able to get the patient on the disc, then we're  creating a healing process with all the awesome stuff there with the disc out of place. And  maybe that might make it actually harder to get the patient back on the disc once we've  kind of started that healing process. Also, PRF doesn't make you numb, whereas local  anesthetic does. That numbness with an unlocking procedure we believe is positive. The  patient's usually pretty freaked out and it hurts for them to move their jaw in extreme mo -  tions. And sometimes we need to open them pretty big to get them to pop back on that  disc. So right now as recording this, we believe that local anesthetics, Carbocain specifi -  cally, is the best for unlocking procedures. That may change. If it does, you'll know be -  cause we will make sure that everybody understands the protocol.  [0:44:48]  But as I'm recording this right now, this is the best, we believe, get them on the disc and  then do PRF. And so, Dr. Mangelson who's doing a ton of this, if he successfully gets the  person on the disc, he'll usually bring them back very quickly to do PRF, and that will hope -  fully help them stay on the disc even better. All right, that's non-reducing disc displace -  ment. Myofascial trigger points, we're going to have tender points in the muscle, give rise  to characteristic referred pain patterns, trigger point injections, and/or physical therapy.  And of course, what would we do our trigger point injection with nowadays? We would do it  with PRF. So all of these PRF whenever indicated, the one exception to the rule is use lo -  cal anesthetic to get them back on the disc. But I would not hesitate to use PRF with a  retrodiscitis. I would certainly do it with trismus. I would certainly do it with myofascial trig -  ger points. The only one would be your disc displacement patient that is a non-reducing  disc displacement. You've confirmed that with an MRI. You know what you're dealing with.  I would try to get them back on the disc and then as fast as you can do PRF as part of  your therapy to help keep them on the disc.  [0:45:58]  Okay, that's it for your initial review of anatomy and kind of basic TMD stuff and basic di -  agnoses of things that you're going to see. And even though it's basic, this stuff here that  we just went over is a huge part of this. If you can really get this anatomy down, if you can  really get these basic diagnoses down, this is gonna be really where you live. This is a  Pareto principle of 80/20 rule. So 80% of the patients you're going to see that have jaw  problems are going to be explained by this 20% that we're going over right now. Really  09/01/25   Page   of 14   15

SSC 2.0 - 104: Examination Part 2  make this your own. Really understand this. And I promise you will be in the top 1% of  dentists worldwide if you just understand things like what a reducing disc displacement is,  what's going on, what retrodiscal tissue is, what a retrodiscitis is. If you understand these  things, you're in the top 1%. And then if you want to be in the top 0.1%, you start treating it,  doing unlocking procedures, doing PRF. That's going to put you in the highest echelon of  dentists literally in the world treating these. And your success rates are going to show that.  You're going to have far more success than anyone else around you with doing this. Peo -  ple are going to be coming to you.  [0:47:13]  Now, right now, you're like, "Okay, I bet I don't want that, Jamison." Maybe as you start do -  ing it and you see the joy that you're able to bring people's lives with getting them out of  pain, it's pretty cool. Getting people out of pain is pretty cool. Getting people to sleep bet -  ter, very cool too. Getting people out of pain, pretty darn cool. And you're gonna be able to  do that. Okay, we started this whole section with the anatomy and all that stuff with pa -  tients being nuts, TMJ patients being nuts, not understanding their symptoms. And I hope  after this section, I hope after you've kind of really brought this into yourself, that you will  be able to stun your patients as being someone that understands now. You make this your  own and you will be stunning your patients, as well as your local colleagues, your medical  colleagues, frankly, everyone around you. You are stunning. You are amazing. Okay, I will  see you on the next video.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 15   15

