SSC 2.0 - 105: Examination Part 3  SSC 2.0   Level 1  105: Examination Part 3  [intro music]  TMD Initial Examination   [0:00:12]  So let's talk about our initial examination and the history of the TMD. So we are figuring  out what is the chief complaint, where does it hurt, and when did these symptoms start.  Now, on the what is the chief complaint, so remember the form that I showed that has all of  the different pains and symptoms and dysfunctions that people will commonly report. And  on that, the patient can put that on a first, second, third, fourth basis. And then remember  also, I mentioned about the magic wand. If I had a magic wand to get rid of any of these  things one at a time, what would you have me get rid of first? Please do that, so that you  are clear on what is the patient's chief complaint. So something you may have seen me do  before, if you were in a lecture with me at a big dental meeting or something, is I will do the  following. I'll say, so what if, here's our patient here, and she says that her chief complaints  are my jaw clicks, it hurts when I chew, and I have headaches.  [0:01:20]  What's the chief complaint? And I'll have people in the crowd say various things. Some  people will be like, oh pain when chewing. That's the chief complaint. Headaches, that's  the chief complaint. Almost no one ever says clicking. And then eventually someone will be  like, "Well, what does she say it is?”  [0:01:42]  Okay. And that's the key point I'm trying to drive home there is, the chief complaint is the  patient's chief complaint. And early on in my career, I kind of, I think all of us were taught to  a degree in dental school that, yeah, clicking, and who cares about that, right? The reason  I think that is, we were taught that way is because they didn't really have a good solution  for it. So if there is no solution, then there's no problem. In other words, if you don't have a  solution, just ignore the problem. And we didn't have a good solution for clicking. It didn't  kind of fit into the paradigm there. Think about how many people in your entire dental  school career, you or your colleagues who had their occlusion changed, not related to den -  tures. So in dentures, we looked at the vertical dimension of occlusion and stuff like that.  And we took that into account. But otherwise, when people came in, we did the dentistry to  wherever they bit. It didn't matter what was going on, wherever they bit, we were gonna do  that crown, that filling, that whatever to that spot.  [0:02:52]  6/19/25   Page   of 1   16

SSC 2.0 - 105: Examination Part 3  So if someone had a clicking jaw, that might require a change of occlusion perhaps, or  something like that. So it's a little bit easier to just be like, yeah, it's no big deal. All right.  So if the patient says, the clicking is the biggest thing to them, then you need to know that  as the provider, because you might not be able to resolve that. That might require a  change in the bite. The change that might be required in the mandibular position, may put  the person into a anterior crossbite, into a class three type of occlusion. And that's not  nice. That's not very attractive. That could further necessitate possibly surgery. So now all  the stuff I just said there is usually avoidable and not problematic, but you need to know all  this stuff in advance. So you don't just blow it off and go, the patient's like, oh yeah, I've got  this, this, and this. You're like, oh, all right, well, probably headaches is the chief complaint  because I have headaches and those bug me, so I'm sure they bug you too or probably  the pain when chewing is the chief complaint 'cause I like to eat, and if it hurt me to eat,  that would be my chief complaint, so probably it is yours too. It doesn't matter what you  think it is. You need to figure out what the patient really says it is.  Range of Motion   [0:04:19]  Okay, now let's talk about range of motion. Here's a piece of equipment that you're gonna  need to get. So there's a few things that you need to get in order to do a decent job with  TMD, and this is one of them if you wanna be pretty specific, and that is a ruler. So sorry,  you are gonna have to spend 50 cents on a ruler, maybe $1.50. I don't know how much  these cost nowadays. [laughter] But they're not that much. You might have one laying  around as a matter of fact.  Range of Motion (Normal)   [0:04:47]  So our "normal" range of motion is 40 to 52. Notice I put normal in quotes there, because  what is normal? Normal is really specific to the patient. So what is normal for a 6'8 guy and  a 4'8 girl is going to be different, isn't it? So in addition to the ruler, the 48-52, that's gonna  be a relatively common range of motion, we should probably say. We also have the three-  finger test.   So Boy Scout sign, three fingers, between the teeth like that, not like this. That  doesn't count. So three fingers vertically and their fingers. [laughter] If that's not obvious,  not your fingers. So three of the patient's fingers, that is normal range of motion. So just  the other day I was teaching at Spear, and one of the doctors there, we were talking about  some of this, and I said, hey can you do this? And she went to do it and she did it really  slow. We'll talk about that diagnosis here in a bit. But she was able to get three fingers. At  first she said, "Well, barely I can." But three fingers for her is normal, and that could be  again, that could be in the mid 40s for some people, that could be upper close to 60 for  6/19/25   Page   of 2   16

SSC 2.0 - 105: Examination Part 3  some people depending on how big of a person they are in general. Range of motion, 40  to 52 in general, three fingers is what they should be able to do.  Range of Motion (Hyper)   [0:06:12]  Hyper is greater than 55 millimeters or three knuckles, which I can't do, three knuckles or  more. And you remember the guy in college that would take bar bets that he could stick his  entire fist in his mouth and indeed could, which is why I took the bet. And that is hypermo -  bile. So we should not usually be able to stick our whole fist in our mouth. Now, some peo -  ple will be hypermobile and the thing to look for there, if you suspect hypermobility, particu -  larly in women, this exists in men, it's just less common, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, but  some people will just be kind of loosey-goosey in their joints. So with that, if someone  opens, you're like, whoa, you open really big. And they're just kind of a normal-sized per -  son and they're opening in the 60s, then do the following test.  [0:07:13]  So you would have them take their thumb, and see if by wrist is here, that's why I said  wrist first, hand towards me this way, and then can I take my thumb and touch it to my  arm. So I can't get anywhere close to that. So let me do that again. So my hand is like this,  my palm facing my face, towards me, now thumb here, can I touch my thumb to my arm?  And that's like wrist flexion, not so much the thumb. Thumb is part of it a little bit there, but  it's just how much flexibility is there. A hypermobile, loosey-goosey joints all over, they'll be  able to touch their arm.  [0:07:57]  Other one is to put your arm out straight like this, and for most of us, this is gonna be  straight across here. For someone with those hypermobile joints, you're gonna see it bend  past that 180 degrees here. So they're gonna go past that. Usually, that same phe -  nomenon will be with their knees. So if they lock out their knees and go straight, you'll see  a bend like that. And then the other thing that I do is have them touch their toes and say,  can you put your palms on the ground? And so, for most people, again, most of us can't  necessarily even touch our toes. So I can't. So for most men, men tend to be a little bit  less flexible and then just also, just how we're kind of put together with our hips and stuff,  that makes it a little bit harder. So for someone who has this hypermobility, systemic hy -  permobility, they'll usually just be able to fold right in half and they can put their palms to  the ground, they can put their nose to their knee.  [0:08:54]  You're looking for that. Now who cares? So if someone has hypermobile joints, the joints  tend to be more commonly injured. This is why gymnasts in the Olympics, it's dang rare for  them to be over 20 years old. You have some outliers with that, but a huge percentage of  gymnasts in the Olympic, at the Olympic level, are teenagers. You have gymnasts in col -  lege, but it's not like some sports like football or basketball, where people tend to go high  6/19/25   Page   of 3   16

SSC 2.0 - 105: Examination Part 3  school, college, and then pro. The gymnasts, usually the highest level gymnasts are  younger, and that's because their joints and whatnot take so much beating that by the time  they're in their 20s, they're usually pretty wiped out.  [0:09:44]  So that's because they're all hypermobile. They're super-duper bendy. They're way more  bendy than normal people. So that's another question I will ask on this hypermobility thing  is, were you a cheerleader? Were you a dancer? In school, and if they say, no, I didn't ever  do anything like that. Say, do you remember being more or less flexible than your class -  mates? Than other girls in your class, were you more flexible or less flexible without try -  ing? Now, notice this little pearl there, and this is ingrained in me at this point, but notice  how when I give you suggestions there on questions you should ask, notice how I never  lead the witness.  [0:10:26]  Okay. So the way I asked that was, do you remember being more or less flexible than oth -  er girls your age in school? I didn't say, do you remember being more flexible than most  people around you? So that'd be kind of leading the witness. So I say, do you remember  being more or less flexible? Give them both. Now again, you just measured and they're  wider here, so you could say, hey does this apply to all your joints? Or even if you just did  this test and all that stuff, and then you would still follow up with a question of, do you re -  member being more or less flexible than others your age growing up in school and stuff or  in sports? Were you a dancer? Were you a cheerleader? The reason I ask that question is  people are kind of naturally selected to go into those areas based on flexibility. If you are  not flexible, you probably don't become a dancer or a gymnast. You could, but you are less  likely to become a cheerleader and stuff like that. So those are questions of the hypermo -  bility. Once again, the hypermobility is just something to kind of indicate that overall joint  instability, which may, depending on the forces put on those joints, it may lead to more like -  lihood of a joint problem.  Range of Motion (Reduced)   [0:11:45]  All right, next is reduced. 30 to 40 millimeters or two knuckles. Okay, so two knuckles, 30  to 40 millimeters. Now this one, I want you to kind of really think about a bit. 'Cause you'll  see this every day in your practice. And when from now on, and even if this is your second,  third, fifth time going through the Spencer Study Club videos, maybe you didn't pick up on  this pearl before. So someone who's opening in the 30s or does the two knuckles if they're  really big, or two knuckles and they're small and then it would be a smaller amount, sus -  pect a chronic non-reducing disc displacement. Now I know we haven't talked about dis -  placements yet if you're just watching these through one-on-one and so forth, but we'll get  to that. But a non-reducing disc displacement, this would be somebody that has a disc  that's out of place in their joint as the name implies, and probably if they're opening in the  6/19/25   Page   of 4   16

SSC 2.0 - 105: Examination Part 3  30s, then it is chronic. So this has been going on a long time. So here's the line of ques -  tioning that you would ask in this case.  [0:12:55]  You'd say, hey, I notice you don't open very big. Do you ever remember your jaw popping  and clicking? That's the question. Do you ever remember your jaw popping and clicking? A  common answer would be, yeah in high school I think it was or it was after I got my braces  off, my jaw started popping or clicking. That's super common to have that be the answer.  Then you follow up with, okay, and do you ever remember your jaw kind of catching on you  or you'd have to kind of wiggle it around to open all the way or anything like that? "Yeah,  seems to me that that used to happen in college or something." And then you ask the final  question, which is, and how long have you been squashing big sandwiches? And then  they think and they go, "Oh man, I've been doing that since my mid-20s and I'm 40 now,  so about 15 years."  [0:13:50]  Okay, that is the history of a chronic non-reducing disc displacement. They started off  normal, they went to reducing disc displacement, they had catching, they eventually  locked and the popping went away, which they probably thought was good, except that  they seem to not be able to open their mouth quite as big anymore. And then over time,  they've sort of stretched out to this point where they can open more normal, but it's still  quite reduced. Now, the vast, vast, vast, vast, vast majority of dentists will never pick this  up. So they'll just kind of take that measurement, if they take a measurement at all, or this  is just a patient that's just like, yeah, I have a small mouth. I can't open very big. Again,  you've seen that every day as restorative dentists, you've had some patients be like,  "Yeah, I can't really open very wide." And for the most part, you're just kind of like, okay,  and just assumed, well, that's normal because you see it so much. It's probably not nor -  mal. Now, one more time, who cares? So if we have someone with a chronic non-reducing  disc displacement, it's possible that they could have some inflammation from being off the  disc all these years, from being on the retro discal tissues instead of on their disc.  [0:14:56]  And it's possible that that person could be more prone to arthritic change in the jaw joint.  Doesn't mean that they will, but it's possible. And if you saw that, if you saw on their  panoramic X-ray even, or you took a cone beam CT 'cause that was warranted, then you  could kind of make that case that I'll bet you are off the disc and that makes sense of why  you've got some arthritic changes in your jaw joint, and maybe you address that. We'll talk  more about that down the road, but just kind of to put that into perspective right this  minute, with someone that's opening reduced. Remember, 30 to 40 millimeters or just two  knuckles.  Range of Motion (Limited)   [0:15:33]  6/19/25   Page   of 5   16

SSC 2.0 - 105: Examination Part 3  All right, next, limited. So limited is the only one that I have a specific number, and this one  is shockingly specific. And I'm sure it does matter if it's a 4'8 woman or a 6'8 guy, but it's  quite amazing how often it is literally 26 millimeters on the nose. So 26 millimeters, I want  you to suspect an acute non-reducing disc displacement. So here the history is, my jaw  has popped and clicked for a long time. Every once in a while it catches on me, and two  weeks ago I woke up locked or two weeks ago I woke up and I couldn't open anymore.  And then you follow up with a question, and it hasn't popped since then, or it has, is the  popping different since then? And then they say, "Yeah, it hasn't popped since then." Okay.  That's an acute non-reducing disc displacement. We're gonna talk about that in level three,  and I'm gonna talk about that in a bit here too. We'll talk about more in level three, but I'm  gonna talk about that in a bit here as we get into the main common diagnosis or common  problems of temperamental disorders that you're gonna see on a regular basis. That's one  of the ones that we're gonna cover. Acute non-reducing disc displacement, and I hope that  you will learn how to deal with that.  Range of Motion (Severely Limited)   [0:16:54]  Next, severely limited, less than 20 millimeters, and this is often 10 millimeters. So this is a  real reduction in range of motion. This is almost exclusively going to be seen after an infe -  rior alveolar nerve block. So after an inferior alveolar nerve block, this is where you're go -  ing to have this trismus.  [0:17:19]  So why it is after an inferior alveolar nerve block is, remember here, so we're going to go,  get my pointer back on the screen here. So we're gonna go through the buccinator muscle  there, through the buccinator there. The white line is the pterygomandibular raphe. So  you're gonna go through the buccinator, and then you're gonna come back. That's a liga -  ment, the white thing, but the inferior alveolar nerve would be going right near that into the  mandibular canal. And sometimes, you go through the buccinator, you pass in front of the  medial pterygoid, you feel no resistance at all. That's when you hit the mandibular canal  area, might even get a little shock from the patient, which means you are right on the  nerve literally. Otherwise, you hit bone there and you give the shot. Other times, you go  through the buccinator and you're actually pushing your needle through the medial ptery -  goid, which you'll feel is kind of like pushing that needle through mud. I mentioned before.  [0:18:12]  That could result in inflammation of that muscle. That inflammation of that muscle is re -  ferred to as trismus. Now that's just one of the causes of trismus. There's other causes of  trismus, but in your case, since you do inferior alveolar nerve blocks every day probably,  and you tag the medial pterygoid every day probably, you're gonna have this happen.  Now, luckily for us, it's quite rare that somebody will have significant reduced range of mo -  tion. I believe I mentioned this earlier, when we're going over the anatomy, but if I were  6/19/25   Page   of 6   16

SSC 2.0 - 105: Examination Part 3  you, when I give an inferior alveolar nerve block, I would just say, hey patient, by the way,  I'll give you the shot today and in order to work on your lower teeth, and you did fantastic.  Sometimes, there will be a little bit of tenderness for a day or two after this, might be a little  bit difficult for you to open and close for a few days, just kind of sore, kind of tight. If that  lasts for a couple days, that's completely normal. If it lasts for more than say four or five  days or you find that you can barely open, get a straw between your teeth, I need you to  call me. That would be unusual and I want you to call me.  [0:19:22]  Okay. And then that way, you avoid someone calling you a month later, "Hey, I haven't  been able to open since I saw you a month ago." And also, now again, a lot of times den -  tists are like, I don't wanna bring stuff like that up, 'cause that's gonna make my patient  concerned or nervous or whatever. But one, you already did the procedure, they're not  gonna say no. So two, when they wake up tomorrow completely fine, their thoughts is go -  ing to be, whoa, not that, yeah, my dentist said this thing might happen and what are they  thinking? I didn't happen at all. That's not what they're gonna think. What they're gonna  think is, hey, my dentist said that I might be sore for a few days. I feel great. I must have a  great dentist. So that's how that works. All right, so suspect trismus if it's less than 20 mil -  limeters.  Initial Examination - Palpation of TM Joints   [0:20:07]  All right, let's go on to palpation of the jaw joints. So we're gonna palpate the jaw joints and  here I'll go ahead and kind of add everything onto this slide here. Here are some of the  things that we are looking for in our palpation. So reducing disc displacement, which would  be popping, clicking, yes, crepitus, normal is nothing. We just feel the joints moving. We  don't have popping or clicking or crepitus. Is the noise bilateral or unilateral? Now with the  jaw joints, it can be sometimes confusing, because we have two joints connected by one  bone. Because of that, if you get a click on the right, you can feel it on the left 'cause it  goes through that bone. So if you are, so I'll always ask. So if I palpate a patient and then  have them open and close, and I feel it on the right side, I'm gonna ask the patient, which  side do you feel that that's on?  [0:21:07]  Again, I try not to lead the witness there. So I'm gonna be like, which side do you feel that  that's on? And they say the right side, and I feel it's on the right side. So if that's the case,  then cool. The other way is if you go from the joint down to the angle of the mandible, and  have them open, sometimes holding down there, it's easier to tell because of just how the  vibrations work through the jaw joint.  [0:21:30]  So just make sure that you and the patient are on the same page, which side you think it's  on. Also, unilateral is more common than bilateral. You can definitely have bilateral joint  6/19/25   Page   of 7   16

SSC 2.0 - 105: Examination Part 3  noises, don't get me wrong, but unilateral is going to be more common. I know sometimes  dentists are, they'll be like, yeah, it's weird, it's only on one side. No, that's normal. So one  side is more normal. Both sides is usually check in the weird column. And think about that  with any joint. Now, granted that the TMJ is unique in that it is two joints connected by one  bone. We don't have that anywhere else in the body, that I can think of. So that is unique.  But again, it would be relatively weird for you to have exactly the same noise going on in  both knees or both ankles or both hips or both shoulders. So we tend to think of these  things unilateral. Jaw joint is special. I'll give it that.  [0:22:26]  Next, able to capture with anterior positioning. So this is where we bring the jaw forward a  little bit, have them open. Well, we have them open first, pop, close down on their front  teeth. And then we are looking to see, can we make that click go away in anterior position -  ing of the jaw. What we're actually doing there, which I'll talk about in a bit, is bringing the  patient into centric relation. So you can use that term too, which I prefer you use, because  until all of our prosthodontic professors from dental school die off, that term CR has kind of  meant backwards and things like that. But it's still a respected term. So if in your chart  notes you said, the patient's reducing disc displacement stopped when they were posi -  tioned into centric relation.  [0:23:19]  Anyone ever reads that, they're gonna be like, okay yeah, good job dentist. You're awe -  some. Good job, doc. You're doing a good job there. Okay, good. And whatever they think  CR is, in their mind, that's fine. But it's truly centric relation where that condyle and the disc  are gonna be in the right position. Now it's anterior and maybe some vertical that you  might have to put a couple tongue depressors in there. And you just see, is there a spot at  all ever, that I can bring the mandible where that clicking goes away? There should be. So  that would be a big check in the weird column, if the person could go full on bulldog and  still click. That'd be weird. Okay, that doesn't make any sense with the anatomy. Now if  they go edge to edge and they still click, that could make sense. But then as you add ver -  tical there, then that click should go away. It should capture the disc, we call that. So play  with that a little bit and you'll know exactly what I'm talking about there. But that is, again, a  where can we bring the jaw to make that click go away? Also, super important that you do  this on your examination, 'cause it'll blow the patient's mind. 'Cause they've had this click -  ing forever and then you just kind of barely bring their jaw into a different position and all of  a sudden it goes away. They're like, holy cow, that's crazy.  [0:24:38]  All right, next, patient perceives noise on the same side you detected. I talked about that  already. Next, unable to detect noise the patient hears. So here I got a nut on the screen  again. So this is the case where you palpate, patient's opening and closing and they're  like, "Yeah, don't you feel that? Don't you hear that, every time I open and close?" And  you're like, nope, I got nothing. All right, so here's what that could be. It could be, well, let's  do it together. All right, so what I'm gonna have you do, I'm gonna have you put your teeth  together. I don't have any water here to do this myself. So get something to drink there,  6/19/25   Page   of 8   16

SSC 2.0 - 105: Examination Part 3  and you're gonna swallow. You can do this just with your saliva too, but I want you to put  your teeth together and swallow. Teeth together, swallow, and you're gonna see if you hear  a little bit of a noise in your ears when you swallow. Go ahead. So when I, or what hap -  pened to you there? So when you swallow with your teeth together, do you hear a little bit  of a click noise in your ears?  [0:25:49]  If you said, yes, I do, then you are normal. You know how I know you're normal? Because I  also get a noise when I swallow with my teeth together, and I am the definition of normal.  [laughter] So now, if you didn't get the noise, then yeah, you're abnormal, but let me ex -  plain. So what do you think that is? What do you think that noise seems to be in our ear,  but the reason I had you put your teeth together, is that had nothing to do with your jaw  joint. Your teeth were together, your jaw joint was stabilized, there was no movement in  your jaw joint in that swallowing. So what is it? The station tube, correct. So your station  tube opening and closing. So when I swallow, I'll get that station tube to open and then  close back and I hear it. Now, from experience of teaching this literally around the world,  and doing that exact same thing that I just did with you there, and having people raise their  hand, hey, how many of you got the noise? I've found that it's roughly a third to half, or  maybe a little bit more than half, that will have the noise when they teeth together, swallow,  and the other half won't.  [0:27:02]  So I do not teach that as, so when you bite your teeth together and swallow, you have a  noise. So if I taught it like that, then half the crowd would be like, no I don't you're full of  baloney. So not everybody will have this, but for some of your patients, that's what it is.  Now this is a little bit harder on the diagnosis part, because I can't not have them do that  by bringing their jaw into some different position or whatever. What you can do is, so  again, swallowing, if that makes the noise for you, you'll be able to experience this too.  Probably you can also make that noise by opening wide.  [0:27:44]  Okay, and maybe, although not everybody can do this, you can make that noise by thrust -  ing your jaw forward. So all of that is equalizing, if you're a scuba diver. So you equalize  that pressure between the outside and the inside, so your station tube opens and then  closes. So your station tube's normal position is closed, not open, it's closed. And when we  yawn or open wide or swallow, then we get this little brief opening and that equalizes that  pressure between our inner ear and our outer ear.  [0:28:21]  Why you wouldn't hear that, I'm not sure, because it's connected to your middle ear. You  would think that your hearing would be sensitive enough to pick that up. But if you don't go  around in life with your ears feeling clogged all the time, I assume your station tube is  working, so I don't think you need to go to the doctor or anything like that, but that is what  that noise is that is not a disc displacement. So some people that will, I don't know if they  just, it starts. So again, theoretically, from my experience teaching, there's lots of people  out there that don't notice this noise. And maybe they then start to notice it, and then they  6/19/25   Page   of 9   16

SSC 2.0 - 105: Examination Part 3  complain about it, possibly. So this is relatively rare that you're gonna have this as a pa -  tient coming in and being like, "Yeah, this clicking of my jaw is driving me crazy." And it's  like, that's your station tube. So again, teeth together, swallow, that's gonna be your test.  [0:29:17]  Last one, eminence clicking. This one is interesting too, in that a lot of dental professionals  will get this wrong. So again, you may have seen this in person. If you first came across  me at the Hinman or Greater New York or Chicago Midwinter or Texas Dental Association  or wherever, some lecture, because I'll do this often, I'll say to the crowd, hey, does any -  one have a nice loud click, nice loud pop of their jaw? And often, I will have dental profes -  sionals that will say, yeah, I do. And then I'll go and I'll palpate their jaw joint. And they're  actually going over the articular eminence. It's not a disc displacement. It's going thunk,  thunk over the articular eminence. Here's how you differentiate this one, is you have them  open with their tongue to the roof of their mouth. So tie the roof of the mouth, and then  open as wide as you can without taking your tongue off the roof of your mouth. That limits  your translation. So you basically rotate, you will translate a little bit, but you won't trans -  late past the articular eminence for the vast majority of people. That tethering there of at -  taching my tongue to the roof of my mouth and not letting it go, that's going to limit how far  I open.  [0:30:35]  And then the click will go away because the click has nothing to do with the disc. It's  anatomical over the articular eminence. For the vast majority of people, this is a, who  cares. So for most people, if they are a little hypermobile, if they can go over the articular  eminence all the way, it's not a big deal. However, there are a few people where it is a big  deal. And these are people that lock open. So they go over the articular eminence, the  condyle goes over that bump. Now you have likely, unless you're right out of school or  something, you have likely seen way more open lock patients than I ever have. How  come? Because you have patients open their mouth wide in your practice every day. And  you'll have these people that go over the articular eminence, and with them open like that,  they'll kind of get a little bit of a spasm there, and they'll get shock and then they freak out.  So this is in dental school, when they taught you the thumbs on the molars and fingers on  the chin and pop them back in like that. That was not a non-reducing disc displacement  they were teaching you. So it gets a little confused, because we use the term locked and  locked open and locked closed are completely different matters. But sometimes that gets  confused.  [0:31:51]  So if you ever have that patient, and this will probably be the only time I talk about this, in  the video series here, so make note, that person who is locking open, you then take their  cone beam CT, if you don't have one already, and you'll see this kind of exaggerated artic -  ular eminence. And if you take a CT with their jaw open wide, you'll see them actually go  way over the articular eminence. If they're locking, then there's a couple things you can do.  And one is, you can give them exercises to practice opening with their tongue to the roof  of their mouth.  6/19/25   Page   of 10   16

SSC 2.0 - 105: Examination Part 3  [0:32:29]  Practice opening with their tongue to the roof of the mouth. Also teach them that they  should never open maximally. So if they yawn, they go, they put their hand here to mini -  mize range of motion. Theoretically, over time, that could tighten up. Nowadays, I would  also encourage PRF injections in the joint capsule, to see if we can't tighten up those tis -  sues a little bit. However, if this person is also systemically hypermobile, so all their joints,  we do the test there, and all their joints are loosey-goosey, that's unlikely going to help  them. They're loosey-goosey everywhere, they're loosey-goosey in that joint some tighten -  ing up of the tissue is not what they need. That person, probably needs surgery. The  surgery for this is called an eminectomy, so as in cut off the articular eminence, and it is  curative. Once they have the eminence kind of smoothed off, cut down and smoothed off,  this won't happen anymore. The cool thing about that surgery, so you know I'm pretty darn  anti-surgery, but not this surgery. So the eminectomy doesn't go into the joint capsule. So  even though it's in the joint, it's not technically in the joint, 'cause that joint is protected by  the joint capsule, and for an eminectomy, they go above the joint capsule and remove that  eminence or smooth out, make it smaller so that the condyle doesn't get caught on it any -  more.  [0:33:55]  That sort of sounds easier than it is, so you look at a cone beam CT and you see the artic -  ular eminence, like, oh that'd be easy, but remember it's 3D, so it goes in deeper, so the  surgeon has to smooth that down quite a ways, and so not the easiest procedure in the  world, but as far as joint surgeries go, that's one I can totally get behind, and again, they  have it once and usually that's it for their whole life, and it's immediately better. So they  have that done, they go immediately to normal range of motion, you don't want them to not  go to normal range of motion 'cause there could be some bleeding there and adhesions  and stuff like that, so immediately after that procedure, they're gonna go to physical thera -  py, they themselves are going to open, open, open, open a whole bunch, and then they  will never lock again if that's done correctly. Okay, cool? Alright, that's jaw joint stuff or  popping clicking noises.  Initial Examination - Spray and Stretch Procedure   [0:34:51]  Spray and stretch procedure. So this is something that we do in our practice to help de -  termine if the sight of the pain and the source of the pain, where it's coming from, are the  same thing. This is another one, just like the bringing the jaw into a slightly different posi -  tion to get rid of the popping and clicking, this is another thing that can be really helpful for  your patient to trust you, to understand that you know what's going on, it's powerful. So  what's going on here is with the ethyl chloride we are spraying, so if you've never had this  on your face before, it's very, very, very, very cold. And we have our fast fibers are sending  all that cold signal to the brain. And our slower pain fibers, they're sending signals too, but  6/19/25   Page   of 11   16

SSC 2.0 - 105: Examination Part 3  they aren't as fast as the signal from the cold. So let's say, that the pain was over the jaw  joint. I would spray over the jaw joint, and typically the way I do this is kind of like this, so I  would spray, spray, spray, tell the patient open wide and close, spray, spray, spray, open  wide and close, spray, spray, spray, open wide and close, and relax. Wait a couple sec -  onds. And then I would say, does that make the pain in that area worse, better or no  change? Note on the slide here, that worse is bolded and underlined, because I hit it, I ac -  centuate it.  [0:36:27]  Again, not wanting to lead the witness, yes? Does that make the pain worse, better or no  change? I said exactly like that. Worse, better or no change? And what we're looking for  there, is that makes them think for a second, and then usually they go, "Oh, that makes it  better." Sometimes they go, "Oh, I don't feel the pain anymore." Okay, cool, that's all what  you're looking for.  [0:36:52]  On the other hand, sometimes they go, "No, that didn't really make much difference."  Okay, then you follow up. So don't give up at that point. [laughter] You have to follow up  with some questions. Say, okay well, feels cold obviously, right? "Oh, yeah, it feels really  cold." Does it feel cold and the pain is as bad as it was before? Or does it feel cold and the  pain is worse than it was before? Or does it feel cold and the pain is better than it was be -  fore? To which they usually say, "Oh, actually, I don't feel the pain anymore. I just feel the  cold." And then I'm like, okay, check in the better column. [laughter] So if their pain is sup -  posed to be here, they say it's in the jaw joint, and you spray the jaw joint, and they're like,  "That doesn't make any difference at all." That's a check in the weird column. That is the  site and the source of the pain actually the same place? Is it possible that their pain is  coming from somewhere else?  [0:37:52]  Another example of this that's kind of myofascial trigger points and referred pain related, is  pain behind the eye, for example. And probably important for me to mention this right here.  We'll mention it also again in level three when I talk about occipital neuralgia. But if they  said in their initial exam, "Yeah, man, it hurts right behind my eye." You're not gonna whip  out your ethyl chloride and spray their eye. [laughter] Pretty sure you wouldn't have done  that anyway, but let's just go ahead and say the obvious right there. Don't be squirting this  in someone's eye. So if they said pain behind my eye, pain behind your eye is almost al -  ways from the occipital area, almost always, from the neck and/or occipital area. So what  I'll do in that case, same thing, forehead pain. I have a headache right here. Headaches  here are almost always from your neck. Almost always. So this is a fun one to learn the  spray and stretch technique with, because you'll kind of immediately get it, that you didn't  spray the area that hurt, but you sprayed at other area, and then the area that they said  hurt, doesn't hurt anymore.  [0:39:00]  So with the neck, if it's a frontal headache, for example, we spray their neck. So I have  them kind of put their chin to their chest. I spray their neck. One, two, three, and then I  6/19/25   Page   of 12   16

SSC 2.0 - 105: Examination Part 3  have them roll their neck around. Go and do that with me right now. That's fun. Roll our  neck around. Ah, it feels good. Chin to the chest. Spray, spray, spray. Roll their neck  around. Spray, spray, spray. Roll their neck around. Wait for a second. And then the ques -  tion would be, does that make the pain in your forehead worse, better, or no change? And  then usually they're like, "That's a lot better." So now you know the side of their pain, fore -  head, the source of the pain, neck. Get it? Well, that's how we do spray and stretch. So I  do all of this on my initial examination.  [0:39:50]  And the typical way that I've taught this forever, and that I encourage you to use as a be -  ginner, and then you can adapt this to your own needs and how you want to do this. But  we have kind of an initial exam, kind of a screening exam, make sure that the patient's in  the right place. And then we have a more comprehensive exam. This works out really well  if you are, as I say, a real dentist, because a lot of these patients, you're gonna get them  like, hey, right now they've got a problem or they just presented with this problem and they  came in for something else.  [0:40:24]  And you don't really have time to do a full workup. So it's nice to do an initial evaluation,  and make sure that you're gonna be able to help them. You've got a pretty dang good idea  of what's going on. And then, you get them back and you get your cone beam CT, you get  your scans, you're able to look at things more in depth. You're able to do a much greater  palpation of all the different muscles. You're able to ask further questions, all that kind of  stuff at a comprehensive exam. So with the joint stuff and the moving the jaw to try to cap -  ture the disc, and with the spray and stretch, most of the time, the patient is pretty blown  away. Because you have now, and we'll get to the TMJ tutor here in a bit as well, you show  them what's going on in their jaw joint. You've got their pain to go away. You made the click  go away. They're sold. They know they're in the right place.  [0:41:18]  Wherever they came from, did not explain anything that was going on, did not get rid of  their pain, any of that kind of stuff. You've done all of that in a matter of minutes and you're  doing this to help your diagnosis. But in helping your diagnosis, you're helping the patient  right then. It's cool, cool, cool stuff. This is what we use nowadays. You see in that picture,  that's kind of the old glass bottle. Now we use Gebauer's Instant Ice, which you can get on  Amazon.  Initial Examination - Initial Diagnosis and Tx Plan   [0:41:46]  Our initial diagnosis, we have no treatment indicated. So you're gonna have some people  that, again, maybe they're just your patient and they made an appointment, 'cause they got  hit in the jaw playing basketball. And now by the time they see you, they're fine. So you'll  have some people that their history makes sense, but they're already doing fine. So then  6/19/25   Page   of 13   16

SSC 2.0 - 105: Examination Part 3  it's like, yep, you're good. Just continue doing what you're doing. Here's probably what  happened to you. Maybe you had a retrodiscitis, which we'll talk about in a bit. Maybe you  had this, maybe you had that. If this comes up again, give me a call. We'll get you right in.  Okay. So no treatment indicated will be one of the things.  [0:42:20]  Initial trial of anti-inflammatories, home physical therapy, and an aqualizer. So in this sce -  nario, you think the person has an acute problem. The history would be something like,  again, got hit playing basketball, let's say two weeks ago. I've really never had a problem  in my entire life until now. This is more acute. Let's see, if we can't do something, get them  over their probable retrodiscitis or their myalgia quickly, and then we're done. I put home  physical therapy here, and we'll talk about also referring to a physical therapist. You could  do either. Home physical therapy is gonna be far less effective, unless you've got a person  that is really, really motivated. Physical therapists, or sometimes referred to as physical  terrorists, because they will get you to do things that you would not normally do yourself.  [laughter] So you can, whatever exercises you give the patient to do at home, you'll know  the patient. There are some patients that they're going to do a great job, and there's others  that are just like, there's no way, they're gonna do that.  [0:43:22]  They're gonna say that they did, but there's no way they're going to. If you suspect that's a  person that is gonna struggle to do what you've asked them to at home, then probably just  send them to physical therapy. The nice thing about sending to PT is most people get like  10 physical therapy visits a year on their medical insurance that don't cost them anything.  So that's why we tend to use physical therapists in our communities rather than doing  modalities in-house and stuff like that.  Initial Anti-Inflammatory   [0:43:52]  So on the initial anti-inflammatory, 600 milligrams ibuprofen every six hours for six days is  a good regimen. Ice and moist heat, we call this. So that would be, they put ice over to  where it hurts, and they gently stretch. While they got the ice pack on them. Then, they go  to moist heat and they do the same thing, and they're just stretching. Ice, moist heat. Now,  if the patient says, "I don't like how ice feels." Great, just have them use the moist heat. I  don't know that I've ever had anyone not like moist heat, so I don't think that that's a sce -  nario that you'll come across, but theoretically, if you did, they could use ice. But the nice  thing with the ice moist heat, is you're not gonna ever have anybody give themselves  frostbite, because they don't have the ice on long enough. So ice and moist heat is com -  mon for us to use and those instructions to give to your patient are in the document center.  Aqualizer as much as possible, definitely at night. So if you're not familiar with the Aqualiz -  er yet, so this is two lakes connected by a river.  [0:44:58]  6/19/25   Page   of 14   16

SSC 2.0 - 105: Examination Part 3  So the lakes are behind the, or within, in between the posterior teeth here. So if you see it  laid out flat here, you see those little pads and then we've got the, so two lakes connected  by a river. So here's lake one, here's the river over the other side, and then lake two would  be between the posterior teeth on that side. The way the Aqualizer works is, as the name  implies it's got aqua, it's got water filled in it, and that's going to push the water from one  side to the other depending on what's going on. So this is our absolute workhorse when it  comes to retrodiscitis. You can get away with using other stuff. I have a good friend in  Spencer Study Club who uses a Plackers, which I think are like a dollar on Amazon. You  can buy a bajillion of them and he just gives them to his patients. Aqualizers are more ex -  pensive. I think now they cost us maybe $15, even $20 a piece. They're pretty amazing  though. So I would probably encourage you to have both. The advantage of the Aqualizer  is it's going to self-adjust as their inflammation goes down.  [0:46:03]  That's the advantage. Other advantage of an Aqualizer, is they can break it. So they can  bite so hard that they break the water pads. If they do, then you just learn something,  didn't you? You just learned that this person's clenching. And if they break it during the day,  you learn that they're clenching during the day. If they break it during the night, you know  that they're clenching at night. So that's a pretty cool aspect of the Aqualizer. Stay tuned.  As a Spencer Study Club member, you'll probably be the first ones to know about this. But  pretty soon we will have, so possibly even by the time you're watching this video, we may  have access to night guards that actually measure force and duration of clenching and  frequency and vectors, force vectors and all sorts of stuff. I'm working with a couple differ -  ent people right now on that, including Glidewell here in the United States, and a group out  of Ireland. So hopefully, we will have something that gives us actually diagnostic data on  bruxism for the first time in dental history. I think that's gonna be a seismic shift in dentistry  once we do that. 'Cause right now, we treat tons of people as if they're clenching or grind -  ing. We have no clue if they actually are clenching or grinding. Aqualizer is a way to kind of  figure out if they are or not, and it's a way to treat people. So this is a diagnostic and a  therapeutic device. I love it. Strongly, strongly encourage you to get it.  Referral   [0:47:26]  Now moving on, we could just refer to physical therapy, as I've already discussed a little  bit. We could refer to another healthcare provider. You're gonna have some cases where  you're like, hmm, that seems like an ear, nose, and throat problem. That seems like some -  thing for an ear, nose, and throat doctor is what's going on there. Hey, that seems like a  pain management problem. You've been dealing with this for 20 years, and there's any  causative etiology, any trauma that you may have had is forever in the rearview mirror. I  don't think this is it. Now, there's other things we can do. We'll talk more in level three  about diagnostic injections and things like that. But to a degree, and also depending on  6/19/25   Page   of 15   16

SSC 2.0 - 105: Examination Part 3  how many checks in the weird column there are, if there's a bunch of weird stuff, then I'm  gonna be more prone to refer to another healthcare provider. Because to be rather ex -  treme, splint therapy doesn't help cancer. So if this person has a brain tumor, I'd like to not  find that out. I'd like to not ever in my career have a patient call us and be like, hey, I can't  keep my splint therapy follow-up, because I got to go in for my brain tumor treatment.  [laughter]  [0:48:39]  I'm not cool with that. Knock on wood, it hasn't happened yet. Because of this, if you have  checks in the weird column, way better to get that person to a neurologist, let them do the  MRI, let them kind of figure out, and if the neurologist checks everything out, and it's like,  nope, there's nothing wrong with this person as far as I can tell, and they still have head  and neck pain, head and facial pain, okay cool, give it a whirl. But again, enough checks in  the weird column, then you should have more diagnosis. That is the real key. Whenever  we are having, this does not make sense, then dig a little deeper. Or the next step would  be for us to get the records that we want in order to do our comprehensive examination.  [0:49:21]  So at that point, we've decided, you know what, I think you're in the right place, here's the  next step. So this is that initial examination followed by the comprehensive examination  model. We don't always do this in our Boise and Salt Lake practice anymore, but if you are  more beginning, I would strongly encourage you to do this. It's a quick initial evaluation,  and then you can gather information that you want, bring them back on a Thursday after -  noon when you're not gonna have three hygienists waiting for you to do checks and stuff.  That's how I would encourage you to get involved in this. So you might want study models  at this point, scans for the vast majority of you, radiographs, possibly your cone beam CT  at this point, or an MRI.  [outro music]  6/19/25   Page   of 16   16

