SSC 2.0 - 106: Most Common TMDs  SSC 2.0   Level 1  106: Most Common TMDs  [intro music]  Imaging Records (Cone-Beam CT)   [0:00:12]  Okay, let's talk about imaging records. So we have our computer-aided tomography, or  cone-beam CT, and MRI. So cone-beam CT, obviously awesome. This is fairly standard  now. So I would make a case that cone-beam CT really is standard of care if you're gonna  be treating TMD or sleep. Now, don't get me wrong, I've treated hundreds, if not thou -  sands, of patients with only a pano. Does a cone-beam CT or even an MRI often change  my diagnosis? No. It usually confirms my diagnosis. However, in today's age, it's just so  easy to get and not that expensive that, heaven forbid, you should ever find yourself in  court or before the board of dentistry, you're gonna wanna have records. It is darn rare that  you're gonna get in trouble for too many records, okay, where they're gonna be, oh my  gosh, that seemed really excessive that you took that cone-beam CT. That seemed really  excessive that you referred that patient for an MRI and had a medical radiologist review it.  That seems really excessive that you got your cone-beam CT read by a radiologist.  [0:01:41]  Okay, that doesn't happen. Whereas if you're just like, yeah, I was treating this person and  I figured a pano was good enough and then something does show up really clear on the  cone-beam CT that the next person gets, right, and this is how this ends up at the board of  dentistry or in court, is because the next person is a jerk and gets the cone-beam and  says, yeah, your dentist is stupid 'cause they didn't take this image like they should have.  And if they would have taken this, then they would have known better and yada, yada,  yada. Dentists sometimes aren't that nice to each other. You ever notice that? So if I were  you, I would get this. My gosh, my first cone-beam CT was quarter million dollars. Now  they're 75 brand new, beautiful machines, same footprint as a pano. Ours was this big,  huge thing. We had to have like double jibbed walls where you have two coats of what's  that stuff called, drywall, right? And it had everything glass thing that the person could sit  behind and push the button, all sorts of crazy stuff like that.  [0:02:42]  Not the case really anymore in any state, I don't think. I'm sure there's probably one,  maybe New Jersey, that makes it hard for you. But most places you're gonna be able to  get a Cone-beam CT and all you gotta do is replace your 25 year old pano and you'll be  good to go. Cone-beam CT too, if you're a real dentist, lots of different cool stuff that we  can see with this. Just amazing technology. It's been around a while.  09/01/25   Page   of 1   15

SSC 2.0 - 106: Most Common TMDs  Imaging Records (MRI)   [0:03:08]  Now MRI is needed for soft tissue. So people ask me all the time, well, can't you see the  disc on a Cone-beam CT? Or can't you, can't you make some determinations based on  the condyle position? What's going on with the disc? Maybe there might be cases, so we  usually take our cone-beam CTs with the teeth together. And if you do it with the teeth to -  gether and you see no space between the condyle and the fossa, probably not room for a  disc to be there. So yeah, you could probably make that case. But an MRI is always gonna  be better because you're gonna see that soft tissue. MRI is not as good for hard tissue.  [0:03:50]  So if we're doing PRF and we're mostly concerned about the arthritic changes, cone-beam  CT is the way to go. That's gonna be the way for us to track that. If we think that there may  be a disc displacement, we wanna get an MRI. So MRI, most of the time you can find a  independent MRI center near you and call them up. Hey, this is Dr. Spencer. I treat a lot of  TMJ patients. I'd like to refer my patients to you for MRIs of the TMJ. Could I find out what  your cash rate is? A lot of these people will pay cash rather than going through their med -  ical insurance 'cause a lot of times TMJ is not covered by medical insurance. For years  now, we've been able to get MRIs for right around $500. Okay? And I said that on the orig -  inal Spencer Study Club videos too. This really hasn't changed. The technology has gotten  better over the years, but it's also gotten less expensive. So the MRI centers that I work  with, they've not ever raised their fees. That $500 includes the radiologist fee, by the way.  So the radiologist is gonna read this.  [0:04:58]  You're gonna get either a CD or if you do this enough, you do this maybe once a quarter,  you're gonna wanna get set up on the viewing system of that MRI center and you'll just  have a portal on your computer that you just log into and you're gonna be able to view  these MRIs right on their server. And that is definitely the way to go. Okay? So cannot  more strongly encourage you to make that connection in your community. MRIs are fantas -  tic. Speaking also of the cone-beam CTs real quick, I strongly encourage you to have  those read by either a dental radiologist, someone like Beam Readers or something like  that, or a medical radiologist, a company called Dental Ray that we use. We also have a  friend that reads our films for our Boise office and has for, geez, probably 15 years or so  that he's read those films for us. We use Dental Ray for our Salt Lake office because our  friend had plenty to do with just ours and then his normal job. Strongly consider that. There  is stuff on a cone-beam CT that we are not trained to pick up, that is outside of our scope,  outside of our area, and it's not that much money.  [0:06:18]  So Dental Ray or a medical radiologist, you're probably gonna be about $50 to $80 for the  read. Beam Readers is maybe $100 to $125. They do a great job, especially on the dental  09/01/25   Page   of 2   15

SSC 2.0 - 106: Most Common TMDs  stuff, Beam Readers. So if you wanna really thorough read with lots of dental stuff in it,  condensing osteitis, stuff like that, Beam Readers is the way to go. If you're more just look -  ing for this person probably doesn't have cancer, that'd be the more medical side, Dental  Ray. There's arguments for both of those. But the other thing too, just as a practice man -  agement pearl here for you, is I find that if you tell the patient, hey, we wanna get this  cone-beam CT, you show them a picture, like I had just there a second ago of all the 3D  stuff, and you say, hey, this is gonna be, throughout your fee, $425, let's say. This is $425,  that covers the medical radiologist reading. Okay, so most people probably think that it's  $500 to have a radiologist read a film in the first place. Probably if you just started asking  people, how much do you think a radiologist charges to do a viewing and a report of an x-  ray or of an MRI?  [0:07:34]  Most people probably can be oh, probably quite a bit, probably several hundred dollars.  Yep. So if you say, hey, it's $425, that covers the medical radiologist reading, most people  are gonna be, yeah, that sounds like a good deal. And then, if it comes back that every -  thing's cool, you get a follow-up cone-beam CT, then you can either just throw that in. So  when we do PRF, we will throw in the follow-up cone-beam CT. Usually we don't have that  one read by a radiologist if the first one was clean, which, would be or we wouldn't be  treating the patient. That one, we're just going to evaluate the condyles and the changes in  those tissues from pre and post. Okay, so that's just a little clinical pearl of what you might  do with your imaging records.  Additional Records?   [0:08:21]  Okay, what about all the other stuff that's out there? And it kind of blows my mind that  these things are still out there, 'cause, man, I don't know anybody that uses this stuff any -  more, except for beginners that are just sort of suckers 'cause they want something easy.  They want a machine to tell them what's wrong, and that would be awesome. If I could just  stick people in some sort of machine and be like, oh, well, there's your diagnosis, that  would be cool, but that's not the case. So I've owned everything on the screen. There's dif -  ferent companies on the screen. I didn't own both. I owned the bio research stuff. Great  stuff. Okay, these companies, they're good. Don't get me wrong. I had a T-scan there in  the upper corner there. I had one of the original ones. It had a serial port, and you'd have  to be over 50 years old to even know what that is. So that's where you plugged into your  computer, and it's the same place that you plugged in your Okidata dot matrix printer. So I  had one of those. Now, I used these things until I realized that it didn't change how I treat -  ed people. So it didn't enhance my diagnosis to the point where it ever changed how I  treated anybody, and I don't believe in doing records that don't enhance that. Now, these  are benign. They're not hurting anyone, so this is different than taking additional x-rays or  stuff like that.  09/01/25   Page   of 3   15

SSC 2.0 - 106: Most Common TMDs  [0:09:51]  I'm not a believer in taking a cone-beam CT with an oral appliance in their mouth, for ex -  ample, to kind of see where the condyle goes or see if it affects the airway. I don't think  that's necessary. So you can buy this stuff. If you want this stuff, I'd probably look on eBay  first if I were you 'cause you could probably get it for 10 cents on the dollar. The T-scan, I  don't think that's terribly valuable. Depending on your practice, it could be valuable for cer -  tain things like dental implants and whatnot where you wanna kind of take pressure off of  certain teeth or implants and you can't rely on what the patient's telling you, then that could  be a good use for it. But as far as TMJ stuff goes and any of the claims that they make  about you equilibrating people out of TMJ problems, no flipping way. So you really don't  need to spend... I spent easily $60,000, $70,000, $80,000 on all these different things over  the years. My nephew, Dr. Cameron Kuehne, who came into practice with me, and then  Dr. Mangelson, who runs my Salt Lake practice, Cameron runs my Boise practice.  [0:10:57]  They've not done any of this stuff, okay? 'Cause I'd already learned everything I could from  these things by the time they came around and I was able to just share that with them  without them having to make the investment. But if you really want to buy some stuff,  here's my super awesome TMJ diagnosis kit. It includes a ruler, a bottle of the spray and  stretch stuff, a tongue depressor, which we'll talk about more later, an aqualizer, and then  of course a syringe. Okay, so this is a joke. Don't go on Spencer Study Club to find out  where's the super awesome TMJ diagnosis kit, but this is really all you need. Okay, this  has not changed. The only thing that has changed from this kit here would be our imaging,  right? And so I don't throw in an $80,000 cone beam CT onto this slide, but I could be -  cause as I mentioned, that is something that you're going to want mostly for documenta -  tion. Once again, it's relatively rare that my mind's blown by what I see on the cone beam  CT, particularly 'cause we always have a pano, if I didn't mention that already, we always  have a pano on the initial examination.  [0:12:02]  In our practice, we reach out to their dentist to get the pano. And either they got a pano  that's a year older or less, or we ask the patient to go back to their dentist and get a pano  and then come to us. Okay? Or our machine can also do a pano. So we'll start with the  pano, and arthritic changes are gonna show up on a pano. So then the cone beam CT is  just gonna give us more detail on where are those arthritic changes and the extent of them  in three dimensions, whereas the pano is just gonna be that one slice, okay? This is really  all you need. The syringe is for diagnostic injections that can also be therapeutic. We'll talk  more about that in level three. Let's get in now to the most common craniofacial pain dis -  orders or temporomandibular disorders that you're gonna see in your practice. And this is if  you are coming in from a dental sleep medicine perspective, these will still be the most  common TMJ problems that you're gonna see. If you're coming in from the TMD side,  you're going to recognize these as the most common things you see.  [0:13:07]  09/01/25   Page   of 4   15

SSC 2.0 - 106: Most Common TMDs  If you are just barely getting started in sleep or TMD, this is what you have to look forward  to, that these are gonna be the most common TMJ problems that you see from wherever it  is. These are the things that you are going to see on a regular basis and can be caused by  treatment of dental sleep medicine, can be caused by ignoring airway issues, can be  caused by trauma, can be caused by having the mouth open too much and sometimes are  also just anatomical growth problems, so to speak. As we talk about internal derange -  ments, sometimes they are iatrogenic. As we talk about trismus.  Retrodiscitis, Trismus, Disc Displacement, Myofascial Pain   [0:13:48]  So let's jump in here with the most common problems. So we're gonna talk about  retrodiscitis or an inflammation of the retrodiscal tissue, trismus, and specifically the tris -  mus that might happen if you are a restorative dentist and are giving infrared vela nerve  blocks. Disc displacement are also called internal derangements. And then lastly, myofas -  cial pain. And we'll also kind of include in that myalgia muscle pain in general.  Retrodiscitis   [0:14:17]  So retrodiscitis is a inflammation of the retrodiscal tissue. So on our picture here of the jaw  joint, we have the disc indicated there. The tissue behind the disc. Retrodiscal, the disc  itself is avascular. No blood vessels, no nerves. The tissue behind the disc is chock full of  blood vessels and nerves. You can see with the condyle outlined on this picture here that if  the one of a couple things here, if the condyle is pushed back or too hard upwards, it could  injure those retrodiscal tissues and cause a swelling or an inflammation of those tissues.  Another thing is if that disc goes anterior, then what is now over the condyle? So if the disc  goes anteriorly displaced, what tissue is now where the disc is meant to be or supposed to  be or used to be? Well, that'd be the retrodiscal tissue, isn't it? And again, the disc was de -  signed to have pressure put on it, and that's why it is avascular. The retrodiscal tissue was  certainly not. So in a disc displacement situation, you now have this impingement of the  highly vascular retrodiscal tissue between the condyle and the articular eminence with all  chewing and opening and everything else that's going on.  Diagnosis (History of Trauma)   [0:15:45]  Okay, so diagnosis, history of trauma. And this trauma typically is going to be recent. You  can have a chronic retrodiscitis, but that would be a little less common considering what  you're going to see. You can see people who've had a retrodiscitis for quite some time, but  typically they're still gonna be within the realm of knowing the precipitating event that this  09/01/25   Page   of 5   15

SSC 2.0 - 106: Most Common TMDs  happened and I've had a problem ever since. I got hit, I had my mouth open for a long time  at the dentist, I got some dental work done, I started wearing a sleep apnea appliance,  stuff like that, where there will be an event that the patient is pretty clear that has some -  thing to do with this, and that will be the history of that traumatic event rather than, yeah, I  was in a car accident 15 years ago and I have a retrodiscitis in my jaw joint. Not as likely,  right? You're not gonna have this long-term inflammation. If you did, you'd have some pret -  ty massive degeneration of the joint probably. So we're gonna talk more about a relatively  acute retrodiscitis.  Diagnosis (Continuous TMJ Pain)   [0:17:00]  You're gonna have continuous TMJ pain. Retrodiscitis will typically be more one side than  both sides. A person could get hit directly in the middle and that would cause a retrodiscitis  bilaterally. But if the more typical situation here is they're gonna hurt one side or the other,  similar to one spraining one side or another ankle, right? Rare that you would sprain both  your ankles at the same time. Similar with the jaw joint. Again, you could get hit right in the  middle and that could cause bilateral retrodiscitis, but unilateral is gonna be more com -  mon.  Diagnosis (Tenderness of Palpation)   [0:17:38]  Tenderness to palpation. You palpate over the jaw joint and that's gonna hurt. So the cap -  sule is what you're palpating there. And sometimes the capsule itself will also be inflamed.  That is technically called a capsulitis. But retrodiscitis is more commonly what you're going  to see. So this palpation of the capsule, probably one of the reasons that it hurts, is you  are compressing into that inflamed area and that hurts, okay? So you could have a little bit  of both. You could have some inflammation of the capsule as well and that would hurt. But  even if the capsule is not affected at all, palpation of the jaw joint, compression of that  capsule will typically be uncomfortable.  Diagnosis (Range of Motion)   [0:18:25]  Next, the range of motion is not necessarily reduced. So the patient can usually open fully,  but they'll do so gingerly slowly. So if I was to open fully with a retrodiscitis, it might look  something like this. Okay, so that's kind of what they do. And you can see it kind of in their  eyes. They're concerned about opening that big, that it's starting to hurt a little bit. That is  going to be the case. And this is similar to if you sprained your ankle, you might be able to  move your ankle through full range of motion, unless there's significant swelling, but you  09/01/25   Page   of 6   15

SSC 2.0 - 106: Most Common TMDs  would do so carefully, right? You would move very slowly. You wouldn't move real quick.  You wouldn't have your normal movement. You would be guarded in all of those move -  ments. Same thing with the jaw joint.  Diagnosis (Acute Malocclusion)   [0:19:19]  Next, they'll have an acute malocclusion on the injured side. Notice the nut on the screen.  So the malocclusion that they're gonna have is gonna be what? So you have a retrodisci -  tis, an inflammation of the retrodiscal tissue on the right side. What is going to be my mal -  occlusion on the right side? Did you say open bite? So they're going to have a posterior  open bite because they can't get the condyle to seat all the way because it's swollen.  Okay? Now, the reason there's a nut there is because typically dentists are looking for hy -  per occlusion, not lack of occlusion. So if you have someone with this and you go to tap,  tap, tap, you might be surprised. It's like, oh, there's no marks on the side where the pa -  tient says that it hurts. And that's because there's an open bite on that side.  Diagnosis (Pain when Clenching)   [0:20:09]  Pain when clenching their teeth. So because of this open bite with the swelling, when they  try to force their teeth together, that'll be uncomfortable. So if you have them say, hey, try  to get your back teeth to touch, kind of squeeze them together. Is that worse, better, no  change? Typically, they're gonna say, yeah, that's definitely worse. Now, if you put a  tongue depressor between their teeth, that won't hurt or anything else. I've got a pen here.  So I've diagnosed retrodiscitis from thousands of miles away, literally thousands and thou -  sands of miles away in Brazil, in Canada, lots of places in the United States where I've had  patients and or dentists reach out to me and they say, hey, this patient's got a problem.  And, will you see them via telemedicine or Zoom or whatever, or just walk me through the  case? And I've done this for years. And retrodiscitis is super duper common.  [0:21:05]  This is why we're talking about it first. And again, what I'll do is even if it's over a Zoom  meeting, I'll say, hey, point with one finger to where it hurts the most. They point to their  jaw joint. I'll say, does that kind of hurt to push on there? Yeah, that kind of hurts to push  on there. Does your bite feel weird at all? Yeah, when I try to get my teeth together, it  doesn't feel like they fit the same on the right side. Or sometimes they'll say, yeah, it  seems like my teeth hit harder on the left side. Okay, same kind of thing, just said different  way. And then I'll say, okay, do me a favor, try to get your back teeth to touch. Can you  squeeze your back teeth together? And you'll see them try. And again, they'll kind of show  some suffering there. And I'll say, is that worse, better, no change? Oh, yeah, that's defi -  nitely worse. Okay, you gotta a pen or something laying around there? Take that pen, put it  09/01/25   Page   of 7   15

SSC 2.0 - 106: Most Common TMDs  between your back teeth on the same side, bite down on that. Is that worse, better, no  change?  [0:22:00]  And then they'll be, that doesn't hurt. In your office, the reason I use a tongue depressor  and not a cotton roll. So I'm trying in all aspects of diagnosis to minimize placebo effect.  We've talked already about not leading the witness with my questions. I don't want to do  anything that would take a patient down a false road, based on my line of questioning, by  me telling them that feels better, doesn't it? Okay, so you'll see that a lot on YouTube, by  the way. If you go look at any of the experts on YouTube, is they'll tend to, do something  and they'll equilibrate. They'll be like, hey, that feels better, doesn't it? They're palpating the  lateral pterygoid, even though you can only see this much of their finger disappear into the  mouth. And you realize that the lateral pterygoid is about that much farther away. And  again, you'll see them lead the witness all the time. That feels better, doesn't it? I'm gonna  do this, and that's gonna fix it. And then they do whatever they're gonna do, and then they  say, that feels better, doesn't it?  [0:23:06]  Don’t do that. So, when you're doing things like this, you wanna ask, does that make it  worse, better, no change? You believe that it's going to make it better. This is all still about  the check in the right column, or the that makes sense column, or the weird column. If  somebody bit down on the pen, and they're like that hurts way worse. Okay, that's proba -  bly tooth. There's a small chance it could be the capsulitis. There's a small chance when  you are distracting that condyle, if that hurts more, then maybe it is the capsule. Again,  way more common to be retrodiscitis, possible to be capsulitis. But if you put something  between their teeth, and they bite on it, they say, ouch, that hurts. I would think tooth is  gonna be 80, 90% of the time, capsule is gonna be way less of the time, okay? The normal  experience you'll get will be the patient says it doesn't hurt. Back to why I use a tongue  depressor, is there's nothing intuitively obvious about a tongue depressor making it feel  better. So if it hurts for them to just try to approximate their teeth, and then you're like,  here, bite on this stick.  [0:24:13]  They're gonna be okay, and you put that in, and they bite on that, and you'll see their eyes  get big, and they'll be like, oh, yeah, that doesn't hurt. Okay, they'll be surprised. Whereas  if you used a cotton roll, then it's kind of like, hey, bite down on this cloud-like fluffy cotton  roll. Does that make your pain worse, better, no change? There's something about that  that's intuitive, that biting on a cotton roll will not hurt as bad. Okay, which it won't. But the  patient, you're trying to a little confuse them. So you give something hard between the  back teeth that there's nothing about that that makes me think that should not hurt more.  Okay, does that make sense? Okay, so don't use a cotton roll. If that's all you got, then  fine. But it should be pretty easy to find a stick, or a pen, or your mirror, or whatever, some -  thing hard to put between their teeth and have them bite down on it. And they don't have to  try to kill themselves or break through your mirror and break a tooth. But you put that be -  tween the back teeth, they bite. That doesn't hurt because they're not able to compress  09/01/25   Page   of 8   15

SSC 2.0 - 106: Most Common TMDs  those retro-disco tissues. That is how you diagnose this from thousands of miles away or  right there in your chair.  Retrodiscitis Treatment   [0:25:32]  Treatment is pretty straightforward. Anti-inflammatories, physical therapy, aqualizer, heart  splint if necessary. The anti-inflammatories, once again, 600 milligrams ibuprofen every six  hours for four to seven days. You can use a Medrol DosePak. I probably would not nowa -  days. The only people historically that we would use a Medrol DosePak on were people  who had had a positive experience with prednisone. So this is a person that you're talking  to them and like, oh yeah, have you ever taken a steroid before? Oh yeah, I took a steroid  for my hip, worked like a miracle. I took that for a couple of days and everything was per -  fect. Okay, so I never put steroid virgins on steroids. Why? Because steroids can cause a  psychotic breakthrough and I don't wanna be on there again. So I know that from experi -  ence of having a patient go through a psychotic breakthrough once put on steroids. Noth -  ing terrible happened. It all turned out okay. But that is what made me learn this 15 years  ago or more was that.  [0:26:39]  Experience and then I had to look it up and read about it. I'm like, oh, all right. So I per -  sonally won't put a patient on steroids unless they've already been on steroids and had a  positive experience. However, I'll don't anyone on steroids anymore. Okay? Because of  platelet rich fibrin. So I would not, if I were you, use steroids. I would, if you're, well, I don't  do PRF injections yet, then learn. Okay, so you wanna treat your patients the way you  would treat your wife, your mother, your daughter, your best friend. That's the level of  treatment that you want to provide, the level of treatment that you would want yourself. I  don't wanna take a steroid for joint pain. I want my body to heal it. Okay, so we will get to  that later. But these are kind of the traditional ways to treat this. This is important that you  understand this because even with us using more regenerative treatments now, still impor -  tant for you to know kind of the traditional, if you will, methods that we've used for decades  and decades that are tried and true. We know this stuff works. Now we're just doing it bet -  ter, in my opinion.  Iontophoresis and Phonophoresis   [0:27:50]  Another way to administer steroids into the area that is not oral would be using ion -  tophoresis or phonophoresis. Now this can be very helpful if you have a patient that is  pregnant, for example, and you cannot put her on systemic or oral medications. I've never  had a OB-GYN say, no, you can't send her for iontophoresis or phonophoresis. They've  always signed off on that. Speaking of which, please note what's implied there that I don't  09/01/25   Page   of 9   15

SSC 2.0 - 106: Most Common TMDs  ever refer people for use of steroids that are pregnant unless their OB-GYN has signed off  on it. Okay, so you would want to call up the OB-GYN, let them know what's going on with  the TMJ problem, and then refer them for the physical therapy modalities. And I'm gonna  connect this all with PRF. It's a little tough one here. Again, if this was my wife, if this is,  well, my wife isn't gonna be pregnant anymore, but if this was, say, one of my daughters,  one of my bonus daughters that is expecting and having morning sickness and they're  throwing up all the time and hurting their jaw, then I would probably do PRF for them to  help that healing process instead of sending them to physical therapy for the use of  steroids.  [0:29:20]  That I would definitely talk to the OB-GYN physician about that option and see what they  say. Don't be surprised if most OB-GYNs are not up to date on PRP. Don't be surprised if  they've never heard of PRF, by the way, is a little side note, and we'll talk more about PRF  here in the coming videos. But most physicians have never heard the term PRF. So be  aware of kind of all this stuff. And once again, though, if you do have an indication, I want  you to learn all of this stuff, even though we're kind of changing how we do these things,  because these are tried and true methods. These work for years. The difference now is  kind of the how would you want to be treated yourself? How would you want a family  member to be treated? Stuff like that. Okay? So not a huge fan of steroids when we have  something better. Having said all that, iontophoresis, phonophoresis. Iontophoresis is  pushing the steroid across the skin with a medicated pad that there's then a negative ions  are pushed into, and then that pushes the negative ions of the steroid into the skin several  centimeters.  [0:30:47]  Ultrasound can be used. That's called phonophoresis. And you embed steroid into the ul -  trasound gel, and then that's kind of pushed across. That's helpful, too, if there's muscle  pain, which there often is in these cases, 'cause they're gonna move that ultrasound head  all over the place. Again, fine treatments to use. Don't think that these are bad or that  these are gonna cause a problem. With respect to injection into the jaw joint, doing it via  these methods is far less likely to cause a problem. One of the problems we believe, any -  way, of injecting steroids into the jaw joint is you've got it concentrated in that capsule and  has nowhere to go. And so that may just be kind of too much dose in a confined area.  Whereas if you're doing the steroid through oral, systemic steroids, if you're doing it  through iontophoresis or phonophoresis, there's gonna be a lot of dispersal of that steroid,  and you're not gonna have that high of a concentrate at any one spot.  Splint therapy   [0:31:51]  Now, splint therapy for a retrodiscitis, any splint for an acute retrodiscitis should be tempo -  rary, and we're just really using that until the inflammation goes down and we get that bite  09/01/25   Page   of 10   15

SSC 2.0 - 106: Most Common TMDs  back on. The perfect splint for a retrodiscitis would self-adjust, and that is this guy here,  the aqualizer. And again, the aqualizer, we have our two pads, two lakes. The pads go be -  tween the posterior teeth, connected by a river. That's that line across the front there. And  then we got the other lake there on the other side. This is awesome for retrodiscitis be -  cause as that, so let's say I've got a retrodiscitis on the right side, I'm gonna have an open  bite on the right side, left side, teeth are gonna come together. So it's gonna push that wa -  ter on the left side, make it higher on the right side, as there's gonna be more water on the  right side. That's gonna be perfectly even posteriorly, no matter what. Then as that inflam -  mation goes down, as my condyle starts to seat more normally, then the aqualizer is going  to self-adjust. And then eventually, back to normal, take the aqualizer out, we're done.  Aqualizer, I have them wear it full time, taking it out only for meals for that four to seven  days. So the same time that they're on the medication, I want them using the aqualizer as  much as possible.  [0:33:03]  Beauty of the aqualizer as well is it's going to help us know if that person is clenching be -  cause they might break it. And then that would give us some information on what's the  next step if we think that that is an ongoing problem for them. Once the retrodiscitis has  resolved, then we have decisions to make on do we treat this ongoing or not? Here's a  couple scenarios there. So if the person was hit in the face playing basketball and they're  40 years old and this has happened to them before, you're probably not gonna do anything  else. You're going to get them over the retrodiscitis and that's it. On the other hand, if they  say, yeah, two, three times a year, I just wake up and I can't get my teeth together on that  one side. I just wake up and I'm in pain. Then we're probably going to do a night guard  would make sense in that case. Or another person, it's like, well, this happens quite fre -  quently. Every few weeks I'll get this. It always seems to be, now that I've been through  this treatment with you, with the Aqualizer and stuff, I find that I have my teeth together all  the time I'm at work, I'm at the computer, I'm resting with my teeth together. I broke one of  those Aqualizers. All that stuff might lead you to think, well, maybe this person needs a day  splint. Okay. So just be logical in your approach on why you would treat them. Once again,  if you have a patient that gets hit in the face playing basketball, has a retrodiscitis, could  you give them a night guard? Sure. I don't know what it's gonna do 'cause that has really  nothing to do with why they had the problem. Is it going to hurt them? Probably not. But I  would try to make your treatment make sense with what you think the aetiology is of their  problem.  Retrodiscitis Recap   [0:34:47]  Okay, so here's our kind of our recap slide here, painting around the jaw joint, posterior  open bite, pain trying to bite down, no pain when they bite on the tongue depressor, and  the treatment is anti-inflammatories and the aqualizer. Okay, stay tuned for how this is  09/01/25   Page   of 11   15

SSC 2.0 - 106: Most Common TMDs  changing as I've already made reference to. We're using PRF in these cases instead of  the even anti-inflammatories and steroids and stuff like that. Everything else would be the  same. So the aqualizer would be the same. The only difference in using PRF is we would  do a PRF injection instead of the medications. Okay, nice for you to have those options.  Note that they are very different, right? So PRF is going to be more anabolic, whereas the  steroid is going to try to stop that inflammatory process, and usually we say inflammation  and that's all bad, right? But inflammation is the first step in healing. So that's what we're  kind of shutting down when we shut down that inflammation.  Trismus   [0:35:50]  Okay, all right, now let's talk about trismus. Now, when I'm talking about trismus, I'm not  talking about this kind of trismus. Here's our far side, just keep him calm for a couple days.  He's got lock body. Now, if you don't get that reference there, lock jaw, right? So lock jaw,  that is our kind of typical trismus. I'll read the definition from Stedman's Medical Dictionary  here. Trismus, persistent contraction of the masseter muscles due to failure of central inhi -  bition, often the initial manifestation of generalized tetanus, lock jaw, synonymous. Okay,  bad news. If you actually had a patient that their trismus was the initial manifestation of  generalized tetanus, you better get them to the hospital ASAP 'cause they're about to die.  [0:36:38]  So I shouldn't laugh, but they're about to die, ha ha, that's not very funny. So my point,  though, is you're not gonna see this type of trismus, but we still call it trismus. So we will  still use the term trismus, even though this is very different than our lock jaw associated  trismus. There's a lot of different things that can cause trismus, and I won't read all of  these things here, but there's a bunch, and we're gonna go to the iatrogenic causes of  trismus, and then you see I have one here with the different colored font here, and the  most common, that is what we're gonna talk about. So the vast majority of trismus cases  you will ever see, and by the way, good news, that won't be that many. Okay? So this is a  little bit of a zebra. It's almost surprising that we don't see this more, and once I explain  how this happens, and I alluded to this earlier in the anatomy review, but it's surprising that  we don't see this more, but the key is, I want you to recognize this, because if you recog -  nize it and you do something about it, then the person's gonna have no problems.  [0:37:51]  If you don't recognize it and don't do anything with it, then you could have some massive  problems, and I'll tell you a story about that. So here's our pterygomandibular raphe. We  have, again, from the cheek, we have the buccinator. From the back of the throat there, we  have the superior pharyngeal constrictor that comes together to form the pterygomandibu -  lar raphe. You're gonna give your injection there. When you put your needle through there,  and remember me talking about this before, your needle goes through the buccinator,  through the cheek muscle there, and that's it. You're gonna pass in front of the medial  09/01/25   Page   of 12   15

SSC 2.0 - 106: Most Common TMDs  pterygoid, get back to the mandibular canal area, bonk the bone, or sometimes you'll even  hit the nerve. When you hit the nerve, the patient goes like, So you've actually touched the  nerve and you know you're on the right spot, and you give your anesthetic and every -  thing's cool. Every day, though, and I apologize that you will now recognize this for the rest  of your life as you give inferior alveolar nerve blocks, you go through the cheek and then  sometimes you're pushing the needle kind of through mud, and that's you're pushing the  needle through the medial pterygoid.  [0:38:54]  This is not your fault. This is not that you're doing something wrong. It's just the unique  anatomy of that individual. When that happens, remember, even though you've kept your  office super-duper clean and you've got every surface covered in plastic, you didn't steril -  ize their mouth. And so you're taking, with that hollow needle, you're taking the bugs and  stuff in their mouth and now inoculating that into a previously sterile environment. Some  people will react to this. Okay? Now again, most people, their reaction will be minimal or  mild. They'll have a little bit of stiffness for a day or two, be a little bit tougher for them to  open as they stretch out that medial pterygoid to open, and that'll be it. And that's gonna  be 99.99%, if not.999% of your patients. But that 1 in 1,000, 1 in 10,000, maybe even 1 in  100,000 patients, maybe not, more like 1 in 10,000, they're going to have a bigger reaction  to this. Maybe that's due to medications they're on. Maybe that's due to some other sensi -  tivity they have. Who knows? But they're going to have a reaction, and that reaction is  gonna be called trismus. Okay?  Trismus Diagnosis - Extreme limitation of Range of Motion   [0:40:05]  So what we're looking for here is extreme limitation of their range of motion. This is typical -  ly the one finger patient. Okay? This will virtually, in our experience, again, since we're not  working in the Amazon or something like that or in an ER where we get someone in who  stepped on the proverbial rusty nail or any of that kind of stuff, we're gonna see people  that have had an inferior alveolar nerve block. And every case that I've seen in my prac -  tice, I've been able to trace back to an inferior alveolar nerve block. And I think I may have  mentioned this story before, just in case I didn't. If I did, you can skip, 30 seconds forward  on this. But I had a patient that the very kind of tragic situation, he sees me two plus years  after this whole problem started. He could only open one finger, about 10 millimeters. And  it all started with him having a dental procedure on a lower tooth. And that was it. Very be -  nign, just a normal inferior alveolar nerve block for a dental procedure. The dental proce -  dure was fine. And then afterwards, he couldn't open his mouth  [0:41:15]  And unfortunately, it was missed by everybody who tried to care for him. He was sent to an  oral surgeon. The oral surgeon thought that it was the masseter or the temporalis. So they  actually cut off. So dissected away from the bone, the masseter and the temporal tendon.  09/01/25   Page   of 13   15

SSC 2.0 - 106: Most Common TMDs  Now, those muscles will come back if given the opportunity to do so. And they did. They  had reattached on this patient. But even doing that, it didn't make a difference because it  was the medial pterygoid all along. It had nothing to do with the masseter or the tempo -  ralis. By the time he'd seen me, there was nothing we could do anymore. That medial  pterygoid had completely constricted or contracted. The other muscles of mastication  hadn't been lengthened for years at that point. So that was gonna be a problem. Physical  therapy couldn't do anything. He was just rock hard at 10 millimeters. You could not open  him any farther than that. That sucks. That's why I bring this up, even though it's a relative -  ly small chance that you're going to do this. But if you're one of the thousand plus dentists  who use these videos right here, guaranteed that one of you, this is gonna happen. And if I  can help you diagnose that patient, then it was worthwhile. Okay? So there's the kind of  stuff you're looking for.  Spray and Stretch   [0:42:34]  With the spray and stretch, they will open bigger. They won't necessarily open full range of  motion, but they'll usually go from 10 to 25, 30, 35 millimeters just with that spray and  stretch. Now, why would that be? It's 'cause you're not spraying the medial pterygoid, are  you? Well, why that works is because you're spraying the trigeminal nerve, if you will.  You're spraying the masseter and the face. And so in that, you're getting those branches of  the trigeminal nerve. Those cold signals are being sent to the brain. And then the pain sig -  nal from the same nerve is not as fast. So the fast signals from the cold are overwhelming  the slow signals from the pain. So the patient sort of forgets about the pain for a second,  and then they can open wide. That's gonna be particularly the case if it's acute. If you have  the guy like I had that was two years ago, that's not gonna make any difference 'cause  then it was more a physical problem, an anatomical problem with the muscles than it was  a central nervous system guarding of the muscles. All right, so that's it.  Trismus Treatment   [0:43:38]  What might we do here in addition to the spray and stretch treatment? We got to just get  this fast. And nowadays, and I'm not aware that this has been done before, but as I'll talk  about in a coming video here, as I give you a sneak preview of the PRF stuff, we're using  PRF in myalgia muscle pain cases, myofascial pain. So probably now, if we see a case  like this, we would do basically an inferior alveolar nerve block trying to get into the medial  pterygoid, and we would leave some PRF in that area and see if the body can kind of fig -  ure out how to heal itself with that. Without that, then our classic treatment for this has  been getting them on anti-inflammatories, usually a Medrol DosePak, and then physical  therapy. Now, I've got on here exercises, but I would strongly encourage you to refer the  09/01/25   Page   of 14   15

SSC 2.0 - 106: Most Common TMDs  patient to physical therapy because physical therapists are gonna do things that a patient  would never do. Okay? The physical therapist is going to push them through discomfort  and pain, and the physical therapist is gonna see them three times a week.  [0:44:50]  If you give the patient exercises to do at home, just pretty much bet on the fact that they're  not gonna do those exercises as much as they probably should, and they're not gonna do  it to the level of discomfort. A physical therapist, if you've never been to a physical thera -  pist, good for you, but if you ever do go to a physical therapist, you know that it's usually  not rainbows and lollipops there in the physical therapist office. It's usually pretty uncom -  fortable as they take you through movements that you kind of don't wanna do, but you  need to do to get that healing going.  Trismus Recap   [0:45:23]  Here's our phonophoresis again, and a Medrol DosePak. So here's kind of our recap of  this. Severe limitation, one finger, almost always after an IA block, refer immediately to  physical therapy, put them on a Medrol DosePak. We're just gonna hit them with every -  thing we can 'cause we want this gone fast. Maybe once you have the PRF skills, you  would also do that, and I might hit them with everything. Medrol DosePak, PRF, you name  it, okay? That would not be contraindicated 'cause you're just gonna try to hit them with  everything you can to make sure this gets better.  [0:46:00]  And I've mentioned this before in the anatomy review there, but it's not a bad idea to let  people know whenever you give an inferior alveolar nerve block, or maybe you could even  narrow this down if you hate the idea of telling people that they might be sore. That's silly.  But I, 'cause again, in my mind, if you tell patients, hey, we gave you the shot today, I'm  sure you're gonna be fine. But, some people might be a little sore, might be a little stiff for  a couple days. If that lasts for more than a couple days, I need you to call me. That's all  you gotta say, okay? So they're not gonna freak out. They're not gonna be sitting at home,  wondering why this is. The next day when they wake up and they're, hey, I'm totally fine,  they're gonna think you rock as a dentist 'cause you told them that they could be stiff and  sore for a couple days and they're not. So if you don't wanna do that just across the board  with all inferior alveolar nerve blocks, then at least when you feel that you've gone through  the medial pterygoid, at least say that, okay? Those people are almost for sure gonna feel  a little bit sore for a day or two. And if that's it, then you're cool. If they, three, four days lat -  er, you're like, hey, if you three or four days from now, you're having a hard time opening  your mouth, just give me a call, okay? And then you're gonna jump on this quick and it's  not gonna be a problem.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 15   15

