SSC 2.0 - 107: What's That Clicking? Part 1  SSC 2.0   Level 1  107: What's That Clicking? Part 1  [intro music]  Disc Displacement - What is Clicking?   [0:00:12]  Now let's talk about disc displacements or internal derangements. What is that clicking?  [video playback]  This slide here, you're going to see a bunch of times. I almost never lecture without show -  ing this slide. It's one of my favorite slides that I've ever built, and thank you, thank you,  thank you to Dr. Wessesen and Erickson for making these amazing videos in the late '80s.  There's really never been anything better done. Terry Tanaka has a great dissection series  on the jaw joint, but as far as internal derangements goes, no one's ever done it better,  and no one will ever do any better because this is anatomy, right? So we don't need  someone to redo this or anything. This is amazing. How these were made, I talked to Dr.  Wessesen about this actually a few years ago, and they, in Sweden, they went to kind of a  retirement home, if you will, an old folks home, you might call it, and they evaluated people  for possible internal derangements. And then they asked those people if they would be  willing to donate their bodies to science, so to speak, to do this dissection of them after  they had passed away. And then those who said sure, then they did this, and they did  these fresh dissections.  [0:01:30]  So these are unfixed specimens, and they did a lot of them. I think, if I remember correctly,  it was like to the tune of 200 or 300 dissections. And you can watch the entire video. We're  going to watch the video here in segments, but the entire video is also on YouTube, and  you can watch from the whole thing, which I'd strongly encourage you to do, because I  don't have, I think the whole video is maybe 35 minutes or something like that, 40 minutes.  I just have segments, so I don't show a lateral displacement or medial displacement of the  disc, where it's kind of like bizarre, where it's off when they are open and it's on when  they're closed, which is you're almost never going to see that. But, you know, it's a cadaver  dissection, so it's real. It's not made up. And that's one of the reasons that I'll talk also  about getting an MRI so that we know.  Normal Joint   [0:02:22]  [video playback]  Okay, so let's go through this, though. So we have our normal joint up here, and you see  09/01/25   Page   of 1   14

SSC 2.0 - 107: What's That Clicking? Part 1  the disc there is fat, skinny fat. The tissues behind the disc is the retrodiscal tissues we've  been talking about. The disc sits between the condyle and the articular eminence. The disc  itself is avascular. So by design, that's where the force is supposed to go, is across this  avascular disc to this big old tubercle of bone, not way up top, where the top of the fossa is  only one cell layer thick of bone. Very, very, very thin. The forces are not supposed to be  mostly superior up to this tiny bit of bone. The forces of our jaw chewing, things like that,  are against the big tubercle, the big bump of bone, the articular eminence. That is the way  it's designed. Okay, so let me stop that. Okay, so again, there's the top of the condyle. Top  of the fossa is off the screen. The disc is here, here, here. Retrodiscal tissues are all here.  So check out that condylar position. See how far down it is with relationship to the articular  eminence? So if you were looking at that on an x-ray, you might say, yeah, that condyle is  really down and forward. No, that condyle is normal. Now all the rest of these we're going  to talk about, there's no space at all.  Reducing Disc Displacement   [0:03:40]  [video playback]  So as we move to our reducing disc displacement, okay, they're off the disc. The patient  opens and goes, pop, into place, into place. And then they come back and they close and  pop, out of place. Now on the retrodiscal tissue there, they open and pop into place. Now  I'll pause that one too. Let's get them off the disc, pop. Okay, so here is the top of the  condyle and there's the top of the fossa. Top of the condyle, top of the fossa. Top of the  condyle, top of the fossa. Hardly any room, right? That disc doesn't have room to be on  top of the condyle. There's no place for it. The disc has to be anteriorly displaced because  there's no room. One of my mentors, Nasher Mehta from Tufts, he said it's kind of like  stepping on a bar of soap. You know, it's going to squirt it out there. So as that condyle  comes up, so we can assume in all of these videos here that that last little bit is the teeth  are in occlusion. Okay, if the patient had teeth, or if the person had teeth when these  videos were made, they put them in occlusion. And that's that final bit there.  [0:04:46]  The disc is going to squirt out. But all the stuff to learn on this video is that the person's out  of place the vast majority of the time. When are they in place? Only when they open and it  goes pop. Okay, when are they on the disc? Only when they open and it goes pop. When  they're chewing, for the most part, what tissue are they on? Are they putting that pressure  against the disc or the retrodiscal tissue? Retrodiscal tissue. If they're clenching their  teeth, what are they putting the force on? Retrodiscal tissue. Okay, so huge difference and  reducing disc displacement has been completely ignored, and I'll talk more about that in a  moment. Completely ignored by dentistry. I mean, completely ignored by all of medicine, of  course. Orthopedic surgeons don't know anything about the jaw joint. ENTs really don't  know anything about the jaw joint. Oral surgeons do, but they tend to be kind of the last  hope for this, so they tend to look at it with a very surgical approach, which one would ex -  09/01/25   Page   of 2   14

SSC 2.0 - 107: What's That Clicking? Part 1  pect for surgeons. But understanding this anatomy will get you a long way, right? Because  we are on that retradiscal tissue. If any other joint in the body was resting on vascularized  innervated tissues and the person was like, this kind of hurts, you would think, okay,  [0:05:57]  So you're off the disc in your back. Maybe we should put that back. Maybe we should do  something to get you off of those tissues. Jaw joint, it's kind of like, well, you know, I guess  eat a soft diet or, you know, you'll be fine. Yeah, that clicking, who cares about that click -  ing? Okay, I'll talk more about that in a minute.  [0:06:14]  [video playback]  But here's our reducing disc displacement. Just remember, there's no room for the disc.  That's why it's displaced. And mostly remember that when the patient opens. So we are  popping on the disc and then off the disc in occlusion. Patient opens and they go pop into  place. In my experience of lecturing to thousands of dentists all around the world, most  dental professionals don't understand this, including dental professionals that this is going  on in their body and they don't understand it. It is very rare when I lecture, you may have  experienced this when I lecture, a common thing that I'll do is I'll be like, hey, does any -  body have a nice loud pop or click? And I'll go over and they'll, you know, I'll palpate their  jaw joints and they'll have a big old click. And then I'll explain this whole thing with them.  [0:07:05]  Remember when I talked about having them bring their jaw forward a little bit to see if we  can capture the disc? I'll do that live in the lecture. It will work. And then afterwards I'll ask  the, I just started doing this actually in the last year or so. I'll ask the person, curious, were  you aware that you were clicking in to place? And so far I'm batting a thousand. They're all  kind of like, no, I thought I was clicking out of place. Okay, I'm not lecturing to the local  pipe fitters union. I'm lecturing to dental professionals and they don't know this. Okay,  sometimes it's a dentist. Sometimes it's a hygienist. Sometimes it's an assistant. But it  doesn't seem to matter. They all get it wrong. Now when we're going to, and we'll see this  video later when we talk about oral appliance therapy, but with an oral appliance, they're  going to open, get on the disc to get it in their mouth, and then we're going to hold them  right around there, let's say, or maybe even a little bit farther forward than that. But almost  assuredly, they're going to be on the disc because most oral appliances, you put them in,  the full thing, right?  [0:08:07]  Let me think about this. There are very few appliances. I'm trying to think if there's any ap -  pliances. There's a few appliances that you could put in half at a time, but we virtually nev -  er do that. So dorsal fin appliances, herb style appliances, obviously you're putting in to -  gether because you can't take it apart. Pull style appliances like the EMA, tap style appli -  ances, we're all putting them in like this. So for normal humans, you got to open big, stick  that in your mouth. When you open big like that, you're going to be back on the disc almost  all the time. That's going to keep you from getting your back teeth to touch, so you're going  to stay on the disc. So for a lot of your sleep apnea patients, the first time in years that  09/01/25   Page   of 3   14

SSC 2.0 - 107: What's That Clicking? Part 1  they've been on the disc for six, seven, eight hours a day is now with oral appliance thera -  py. That's why you got to understand this stuff, because that person is going to be more  likely to develop a what? Posterior open bite, because this is actually a better position for  their jaw joint, for their disc, for everything, and you need to let them know about that in  advance.   So we'll come back to that later when we're talking about oral appliances and  stuff, but just remember that right now. I'll leave that there.  Non-Reducing Disc Displacement   [0:09:19]  [video playback]  Okay, let's go to the non-reducing displacement. So once again, we have no space be -  tween the condyle and the top of the fossa when this comes back here. I mean, it's right  there. You just see the condyle here, articular eminence, so there's zero space there. What  tissue is that that the condyle is on all the time? That's the retrodiscal tissue. The disc is  this tissue that's squished up in front, okay? And as it will show on the video here, and we'll  watch these little segments in just a second, but the patient can actually have fairly normal  range of motion if they've had this chronically and they've kind of stretched it out of place  over time.  Degenerative Arthritis Joint   [0:09:55]  [video playback]  And then last, we have our degenerative arthritis joint here where we are bone on bone,  the retrodiscal tissue attachments there, the disc is out here in front, the remnant of it,  there's a little broken tissue there, and we are bone on bone.  [0:10:14]  Now, the other thing I'd like to point out on this is, and by the way, speaking of that, on the  degenerative joint disease, when you've seen patients and they've got the crepitus, think  back, how much pain are they usually in as far as their jaw joints are concerned? Did you  say very little? Or none? Right. Okay, so it's normal when you get people to this level. This  is even on the Wilkes scale, that when they get to the degeneration point, that they usually  don't hurt anymore. Why don't they hurt anymore? Well, because there's nothing to hurt.  So the retrodiscal tissue is all broken away, they're bone on bone, they kind of burnish the  bone, the bone doesn't have the same receptors innervation that the soft tissue does, the  jaw joints don't really bear weight, like your hips or your knees or other joints might, so it  doesn't hurt. Okay? So that's kind of a nice thing about the jaw joints, is once they get to a  certain point, they kind of burn out and we don't have that pain anymore. It's this headed  there that can be painful. Now, will, you know, all people with reducing disk displacement  eventually have degenerative joint disease? Well, this dead person didn't.  09/01/25   Page   of 4   14

SSC 2.0 - 107: What's That Clicking? Part 1  [0:11:35]  So that dead person, they had a really nice loud popping click until they died. And it did not  progress, if you look at the condyle on that one, it's nice and smooth. Everything's cool.  Well what about non reducing displacements? Certainly being on that retrodiscal all the  time, it's eventually going to break down, right? Well it didn't in that dead person. And the  condyle looks fine, so we don't have that arthritic changes. To get the arthritic changes,  normally you're going to have a breakthrough of the retrodiscal tissue, not always. But  you're going to have this inflammatory process that breaks down the bone and sneak pre -  view again, with the PRF what we're seeing is a return of that bone if we can put the prop -  er healing aspects back into it.  Internal Derangements - Simplistic Approach   [0:12:19]  All right, now we're going to talk about kind of a simplistic approach. We're going to look at  reducing displacements and non-reducing displacements and that's pretty much it. I would  encourage you to go and check out on YouTube the entire video so you can see the medi -  al displacements and some of the kind of more weirdo displacements that the disc can do.  But reducing displacement, non-reducing disc displacement, this is going to be 98% of the  disc displacements or internal arrangements that you deal with, in addition to of course  degenerative joint disease.  [0:12:49]  So disc problems, it's going to be reducing displacement or non-reducing disc displace -  ment and then you're also going to see normals of course and you're going to see people  that don't have discs anymore because they're all broken down but with regard to disc dis -  placements, reducing, non-reducing, these are going to be the ones that you see. All right,  so let's look at Dr. Wessesen and Erickson's video of the normal joint and just kind of listen  to the commentary there, and learn a little bit more there.  [video playback]  [0:13:20]  Dr. Wessesen:   This is a normal temporomandibular joint. The disc is biconcave and it's  located in a superior position. The essential part of the disc is consistently lying in between  the condyle and tube. During opening where as rotation in the lower compartment and  more of translation in the upper compartment.  [0:14:00]  Dr. Jamison Spencer:   Okay, pretty straight forward, there's our normal. Once again, you  don't see a lot of normal joints if you start looking at your cone beam CTs, looking for that  space around the joint, you're going to notice that you don't see a lot of normal joints. They  may still be okay, but you're seeing more joints where the condyle is scooched up more  superior and the disc is probably hanging on for dear life to stay in the right spot and its  about to displace. Okay, so then we will go from normal to a discal dislocation with reduc -  09/01/25   Page   of 5   14

SSC 2.0 - 107: What's That Clicking? Part 1  tion, also referred to as a reducing disc displacement. Okay? So discal dislocation with re -  duction, or reducing disc displacement. Let's watch that.  [video playback]  [0:14:52]  Dr. Wessesen:   In this joint, the disc is anteriorly displaced and it's reduced on opening  with a click. This joint demonstrates reciprocal clicking, which implies clicking during open -  ing followed by clicking during closing. The disc is here again anteriorly displaced. The  configuration of the joint compartments corresponds very well to what has been seen on  arthrograms and to observations during surgery. Reciprocal clicking is a clinical sign of an -  terior disc displacement with reduction.  [0:15:53]  Dr. Jamison Spencer:   So Dr. Wessesen used there the term reciprocal clicking. This is  the click on and the click off. Clinically, you will usually note the on click easier than the off  click. But if you feel it, palpate, you'll note it. And it's really important that you get good at  this because you're going to need to educate the patient. I know it seems nuts that we  have to educate people on what's going on in their own body. But as I mentioned a second  ago, dental professionals don't even understand this when it's going on in their own body.  So when I palpate, I'll palpate and have the patient open. It's like, okay, you feel that?  You're on the disc now. Open wide, close down, get your teeth close together. Do you feel  that? Now you're off. And again, you want to hear a pop the second time. Usually you just  feel it. And then have them open click, close click, open click, close click. If you're like, I'm  not positive exactly what you're talking about there, Jamison. Talk to your staff members.  Almost assuredly, one of your staff members has a pretty good reducing disdisplacement.  And you can start with them, and when we get to splint therapy and stuff, you can start  treating them as well. But get good at this palpation of understanding that's an opening  click, that's a closing click.  Centric Relation   [0:16:55]  All right, let's now move on to a brief discussion of .. [video playback]  I hope you enjoyed the drama of that. That's just to wake you up from time to time. So I'm  going to talk a little bit about centric relation. And I graduated dental school well after 1987,  in spite of what you might think. I was lecturing at Spear this last week, and a dude is talk -  ing to me, and he's like, yeah, I'm pretty sure you and I are about the same age. And the  dude was like, 66, and I'm like 55. Now, granted, particularly for us dudes, you get to a cer -  tain point, and I think actually for a lot of ladies too, you get to a certain point, it gets kind  of difficult after age 50. You never know. You got some people that look a lot younger,  some people look older. Apparently, I look older. So that sort of sucks. Anyway, I graduated  in 1998 from dental school.  [0:18:00]  09/01/25   Page   of 6   14

SSC 2.0 - 107: What's That Clicking? Part 1  Many of you watching this video now weren't even born in 1987. But here's my point in  bringing in 1987 is 1987 definition of centric relation, which continued until relatively re -  cently, is the following. The maximum mandibular relationship at which the condyles articu -  late with the thinnest avascular portion of the respective discs, with the complex in the an -  terior superior position against the shapes of the articular eminences. That's the definition.  Now, most of the time when I lecture and I'll ask, hey, who here graduated after 1987? It's  usually almost the entire room at this point. There will be a few holdouts that were a little  bit older. And then I'll ask, okay, give me some of the definitions that you were given in  dental school for centric relation. And usually someone will say anterior superior, and then  I'll say, okay, and how did your professor put someone into CR in PROS? And when you  were in PROS and you're doing crowns or bridges or whatever, dentures, how did they get  the person in CR? And they'll always say, well, they kind of push their chin back. Okay,  how do you push someone back to anterior superior? Now, some of you will say, well, you  know, Dawson position there, you rotate.  [0:19:16]  And yeah, it kind of seems like it's down on the chin, but you're kind of pulling up here and  you're rotating the condyle that way anterior superior. Okay, I'll buy that. Most people actu -  ally can't do that though. So it tends to be this retrusive type of force. And again, I don't  remember ever being told anterior superior. I remember terminal hinge and rear most, up -  per most, mid most, and all sorts of stuff like that. So where does all that stuff come from?  Well, there's been a bunch of different definitions of CR over the years. So the one I just  shared with you from '87 is anterior superior. But then glossary of prosthodontic terms  number three, it said most retruded. That's a big difference between the second definition  here and the first definition. This is going back in time as we go one, two, three, four, five,  six, seven. So what's up with that? How did they go from most retruded? Obviously most  posterior is another way to say that. And anterior superior. Okay, so did I just say most  posterior? I think I did. Most posterior would be most retruded and the anterior. Okay,  those are opposite terms.  [0:20:25]  Those are completely different. And a lot of people will give, I just mentioned Dawson a  second ago, they'll give Pete Dawson credit for getting us back into normal anatomy here  with the condyles in the right spot, with the disc in the right spot. That is CR. Going back in  time three, most retruded, most posterior. Four, most posterior. Five, mid most, upper  most, most superior. Combination of five and six, upper most and rear most. That's where  we get rear most, upper most, mid most. Again, if you're my age or close to, if you're in  your '50s, you probably remember that term, rear most, upper most, mid most. As a matter  of fact, when I lecture and I have people raise their hand, I've had people graduate dental  school five years ago and they were still taught rear most, upper most, mid most. How  come? Well, because their professors are my age and that's what they were taught. So we  just keep perpetuating this down the road here. Now, here's the oldest definition of CR.  Let's look at that more closely. This is by Dr. Ramsford, a clinically determined position of  09/01/25   Page   of 7   14

SSC 2.0 - 107: What's That Clicking? Part 1  the mandible placing both condyles into their anterior upper most position. Anterior upper  most position. This can be determined in patients without pain or derangement in the TMJ.  [0:21:32]  That's another way of saying the disc has to be in the right spot. So the oldest definition  and the 1987 definition are the same definition. Anterior superior disc in the right spot. That  is centric relation. So this is why later in level three, when I'm talking about splint therapy  and whatnot, I use the term CR. If we have somebody who has an anterior disc displace -  ment with reduction and we're using an appliance to bring them back on the disc, I don't  call that anterior repositioning. I don't call it that because it's actually centric relation. I'm  bringing the condyle into centric relation. I strongly encourage you to use that term be -  cause it's going to be more palatable, if you will, or acceptable by your dental colleagues.  So they could know nothing about jaw problems, which again, most dentists don't know  anything about jaw problems, myself included when I got out of dental school. I had like an  hour, right? You too. I fit a Nygaard in dental school and that was just for someone who  had bruxism. I never treated anyone with a TMJ problem, neither did you. Or very unlikely  that you did.  [0:22:47]  So using the term CR, most dentists are kind of like, yep, that's good, I think, because I  remember my professor saying CR a lot, so I bet you that's good. But not just is it good to  use it because dentists will think it's good, it's good to use that term because it's the right  term.  9th Edition of Glossier Prosthodontic Terms and Beyond   [0:23:04]  But here's a little bit of a bummer. So from the ninth edition of the Glossier Prosthodontic  Terms and beyond now, they changed the definition once again. And I am blessed to get  invited to speak at prosthodontic meetings pretty regularly. I just spoke at one a couple of  weeks ago. And I'm going to see if I can't use my minimal influence here with the prostho -  dontic community to get them to change it back. See if you see, see if you can pick out  what is missing in this definition. Centric relation, acronym is CR. A maximum mandibular  relationship independent of tooth contact in which the condyles articulate in the anterior  superior position against the posterior slopes of the articular eminences. In this position,  the mandible is restricted to a purely rotary movement from this unstrained, physiologic,  maximum mandibular relationship, the patient can make vertical, lateral, or protrusive  movements.  [0:24:01]  It is a clinically useful, repeatable reference position. What did they miss in that definition?  Did you say the disc? That's right. So how do you have a definition of an anatomical posi -  tion and leave out the soft tissue? That blows my mind. So the definition is wrong by defini -  tion when it says the condyles articulate against the posterior slope of the articular emi -  09/01/25   Page   of 8   14

SSC 2.0 - 107: What's That Clicking? Part 1  nences. If the condyle is against the slope of the articular eminence, that means there's no  soft tissue between it. If there's no soft tissue between it, that would be degenerative joint  disease. So it's wrong by definition. It drives me crazy that there was a group of, I'm sure,  highly intelligent people that put this together and no one in the room was like, what about  the disc? So here's my theory on why did they leave out the disc? We have the disc in the  other definitions going back to the first definition. So why now it's like, yeah, heck with the  disc. Because if there is no solution, there is no problem. If their person has a anterior dis -  association with reduction, i.e. Popping and clicking, the older definitions of centric rela -  tion, going back to the original definition, that person's not in CR when their teeth are to -  gether or close to together.  [0:25:29]  They're only in CR when the disc is in the right spot, when they don't have a derangement,  as Ramsford said. Does that make sense? So do me a favor and as you go out and talk to  your local prosthodontists, surgeons, people like that, bring this stuff up. They'll appreciate  that you understand this. They'll appreciate that you recognize kind of some of the silliness  here and that CR was pushing the jaw back in the brain or back in the ear holes for years.  And then we realized, well, that's not right. And that doesn't make sense either when we  talk about airway, does it? And it's sad to me that on a lot of things like this in dentistry, we  can't even talk to each other because if I say centric relation, if I'm like, yeah, I did a centric  relation splint and I don't define what I even mean by that, you could think that means a  splint that pushes the jaw backwards or someone else could think that means a flat plane  splint or someone else could mean, you know, that means a anteriority program or I don't  know what they think. But I have to define what I mean by centric relation in order for us to  have a conversation. But most of the time that would never happen. If you were to just  again, go to your local dental society, give a presentation and say, yeah, so this is why I  use a centric relation splint. Everyone in the room will be kind of like, yep, centric relation  right on. Okay. And if you had them write down their definitions, you would get a different  definition from everyone in the room.  Discal Dislocation without Reduction   [0:26:55]  Okay, moving on. Let's now talk about discal dislocation without reduction.  [video playback]  [0:26:55]  Speaker 2:   The next joint demonstrates anterior disc displacement without reduction,  which implies that the disc is consistently lying anterior to the condyle. During all mandibu -  lar movements, the disc is lying anterior to the condyle and at maximum opening, the disc  is folding downwards as seen here. There is a considerable stretching in the posterior disc  attachment at maximum opening. And even if the disc is displaced, there can be a good  range of motion due to deformation of the disc.  09/01/25   Page   of 9   14

SSC 2.0 - 107: What's That Clicking? Part 1  [end of video playback]  [0:28:06]  Dr. Jamison Spencer:   Okay, so as you saw on the video here, the person can open or  they can stretch the person anyway in this circumstance, really wide. So with a chronic  non-reducing disc displacement, remember back in the examination when I talked about  the 30 to 40 millimeter person or the two knuckles, but they can't do three fingers, that's  what's going on. So smooth, no noises, and they're opening smaller. And that's where you  take them through that history. I'll recap that here in just a second. But that's why some  people with a non-reducing disc displacement can have close to, not quite, but usually  close to full range of motion. And if that's on one side, then they might still deflect a little  bit. If it's bilateral, then they would still open straight. So that's something you want to be  watching for. And once again, on your cone beam CT, if you take a cone beam CT with the  teeth together, then you would note what? What would you look for on the cone beam CT  that might give you an indication that this is what's going on? If you took a cone beam CT,  teeth together, all the way, not like apart a little bit, but all the way together, what would you  look for?  [0:29:19]  You'd look for very little space between the condyle and the fossa. If you see bone, tiny  little space, more bone for the fossa, no room for a disc, well, probably no disc there then,  right? That wouldn't be definitive. I'm going to talk about the definitive way to diagnosis in  just a moment, but a cone beam CT, along with your examination, along with the patient's  history, would give you a pretty darn good idea of what's going on with the disc. Now I'll tell  you how to definitively do it here, but that would give you a pretty good idea.  Diagnosis of Discal Dislocation without Reduction   [0:29:54]  So here is how we diagnose this definitively, history and history plus imaging MRI being  what we're going to use nowadays. So the history of an acute non-reducing disc displace -  ment would be 26 millimeters of opening. They deflect to the affected side. Deflection is  your jaw goes off to one side and stays there. So this is deflection. Okay, that would be de -  flection. That'd be my right side is stuck. So my left side will rotate. My right side can't  translate anyway. So my left side will translate, my right side will just rotate. That's deflec -  tion.  [0:30:27]  Deviation is more typical of a reducing disc displacement. So here the jaw goes off to the  side, comes back to the center. So if I had a reducing displacement on this side, I might  open a little bit, pop, come back to center. That's deviation. So you can remember that with  there's a V in deviation. There's a F in deflection. And one of my Spencer study club mem -  bers cutely says that's because if you have deflection, that means you're F'd. I don't know  that that's the case. We're going to get these people on the disc all the time. But deviation,  09/01/25   Page   of 10   14

SSC 2.0 - 107: What's That Clicking? Part 1  deflection stays off to the side. They're going to have a history of reducing displacement.  They're going to have a history of their jaw catching on them. And then typically there's ei -  ther going to be some sort of trauma or the vast majority of the cases, it's going to be they  wake up locked. That is your classic history for a acute non-reducing disc displacement.  Macro trauma, getting hit in the face, that could certainly cause it.  Macro Trauma and Micro Trauma   [0:31:24]  Micro trauma also could cause it from bruxism, stuff like that. Here's the cone beam CT of  a patient that came in to see us for a TMJ problem.   And we took the cone beam CT, we  recreated a pano, and here's what we saw on the pano. Now, as I've mentioned multiple  times, we have our cone beam CTs taken with the teeth together. Now this guy kind of  snuck one by us here and he didn't put his teeth together all the way, did he? So this pano,  this reconstructed pano, looks like any pano you've ever seen. Looks like we had him bite  on a little stick, which one does with a pano, so that brought his condyles down and for -  ward a little bit. But here's the crazy thing, so straight above the pano picture there, that's  his airway on the mid-sagittal plane there, 0.8 millimeters at the narrowest part, 0.8 mil -  limeters in the narrowest part. Now I've never seen anyone else like this before, but this  was nuts. So this guy, so notice on the pano, where are his back teeth? Are they touching?  No. That's his airway with his jaw protruded a little bit. That's his airway with his teeth  apart. Isn't that nuts? So this guy, again, never seen this in anyone else, when he brought  his teeth into occlusion, it blocked his airway.  [0:32:42]  Teeth in occlusion meant not breathing during the day. So, our airway is held open by re -  flex during the day. You're not sitting there and all of a sudden it's like, I stopped breathing  there. Sorry about that. No, people don't have awake sleep apnea. They have sleep ap -  nea. They don't have awake apnea. Well, this guy could kind of almost have awake apnea  if he put his teeth together. So he was not much of a clencher because he couldn't breathe  if he was a clencher. But this made us ask those questions that we'll teach you a little bit  later here on as we get rolling into the dental sleep medicine stuff. And indeed, this guy,  when we sent him for a consultation with a sleep doctor, the sleep doctor got a sleep  study. He had sleep apnea. And treating the sleep apnea resolved his TMJ problem.  Okay? So maybe this whole sleep apnea thing has something to do with this. And we will  talk about that in depth. That possibly airway issues are a cause of bruxism. And as I'm  recording this, I gave a lecture a few weeks ago at the American Academy of Fixed  Prosthodontics.  [0:33:59]  And the title of my lecture was Bruxism's Relationship to Obstructive Sleep Apnea, Known  for Decades, Still Mostly Ignored. And that's the way it is, you know? And even after my  lecture, I had a few dentists come up and thank me. And it was actually kind of a cool ex -  09/01/25   Page   of 11   14

SSC 2.0 - 107: What's That Clicking? Part 1  perience. I had one of my professors was there. And boy, did he look old. But it was awe -  some. We had this awesome discussion. It was kind of neat to reminisce with him. And he  actually had a major impact on me. He's frankly the one who said I should pursue this ca -  reer into taking over this TMD practice in Boise. And I joked with him that I've always told  people that's probably because he didn't like me. Because who in their right mind would  have somebody go take over a TMJ limited practice? And he kind of laughed about that.  But anyway, at this meeting, it was mostly about the latest advances in zirconia and aes -  thetic materials and stuff like that. And most of the prosthodontists there, and half the  crowd was foreign, the cases they were showing were beyond beautiful. The artistry of the  dentistry there was amazing.  [0:35:21]  But again, this topic of, hey, by the way, maybe they're breaking their teeth because  they're trying not to die. Most of the people there are kind of like, yeah, whatever. Just, you  know, what new material can you show me? What technique can you show me to make it  look better? So, you know, there's still some work for us to do, even though this has been  around a long time. Okay, we'll talk more about that later.  Discal Dislocation Without Reduction (Chronic)   [0:35:42]  So back to disc displacement without reduction, acute, we've discussed already the factors  you're going to look for there. Chronic, it's going to be the same history, but it's gonna be a  long time ago. So my jaw used to pop and click after I got out of braces. My jaw would  catch on me every once in a while in college, but I could always kind of move my jaw and  open fully. And I've been squashing Subway sandwiches for the past 15 years. That is your  history for a chronic non-reducing displacement, a chronic locked. I don't like using the  term locked jaw, but we will use that term because we also say unlocking.  [0:36:18]  But remember, sometimes locking is open wide. Okay, that's over the articular eminence.  We're talking about the disc being locked out in front. So non-reducing displacement is the  term I prefer to use. Diagnostic imaging is critical in this. We just had a case in Spencer  Study Club where a really good doctor is working up this patient. She's doing PRF on this  patient. The patient's having kind of more locking than, she had a history of locking. Now  she seems to be having more. I think that could be because the PRF is actually helping  the disc to get into better shape. And maybe that's why she's having more locking than she  was before. We'll see. But in my conversation with this doctor and on the Facebook group,  I said, okay, you're making these assumptions that she's locked and you're probably right,  but we really need an MRI in order to confirm that the person is off the disc.  Diagnostic Imaging (MRI)   [0:37:21]  09/01/25   Page   of 12   14

SSC 2.0 - 107: What's That Clicking? Part 1  The prescription for the MRI, as I have on here, closed and wide open view. So let me give  you the prescription. You can write this down, stick it on a post-it note someplace. Okay, so  here's the prescription for an MRI.  [0:37:32]  MRI of the bilateral TM joints, closed and wide open views, no contrast. Suspect non-re -  ducing disc displacement of the blank joint, right or left or bilateral. Okay, that's it. Let me  say that again. MRI of the bilateral TM joints, closed and wide open views, no contrast.  Suspect non-reducing disc displacement of the blank joint. Okay, that's how you do it.  That's it. Don't get too worked up about that they need a TMJ coil. Those are like $50,000  or so. Most of the MRI centers that I've worked with have never had a TMJ coil. It's really  not important. You'll get great images just with kind of their standard, just sticking them in  the tube. And speaking of sticking them in the tube, I've also got great images from open  MRI centers, the ones where it's just open, they can see out of their peripheral vision, and  the ones that even they would stand up, those work too. Don't sweat that kind of stuff. It's  like, it's not going to be good enough if I get this. Don't worry about it. Any MRI that you're  going to get nowadays is going to be just fine.  [0:38:44]  The radiologist, you want to go over this with the radiologist because, surprise, they got  about as much training in TMJ in their radiology school as you did in dental school, which  is to say none. So you're going to be going over this with them. It's quite likely, unless  you've got someone like me in your area or some other Spencer Study Club member  who's been doing a lot of unlockings, that the local MRI place, the radiologist, this is possi -  bly the first MRI of the jaw joint that they've seen, literally. So make sure you go over it with  them, talk to them about it, and make sure that you're on the same page. It's not uncom -  mon at all for you to see the report be wrong. So I never ever, so if you're in the Spencer  Study Club Facebook group and someone talks about an unlocking, you will see that my  question will always be, did you look at the MRI? If they say, yeah, I've got a patient. We  got an MRI that says that they have a non-reducing displacement, or we got an MRI and it  says that it's normal.  [0:39:48]  Regardless of what they say, and sometimes they'll even put the report, couldn't care less.  My question will be, did you look at it yourself? And then usually they come back and go,  well, I don't know how. Okay, so you're going to figure out how, and you can either get it on  a CD, which is a pain in the butt, because then you got to get a CD player for your com -  puter or whatever, and I have one to plug into my Mac. It's a pain in the butt, so I don't like  doing that. Nowadays, they're all online. So you just need to get with the MRI center and  say, hey, I need the password. I need to log in. I need the app. I need whatever I need in  order to be able to see these MRIs on your system, and they will hook you up. And then  you go through it, and if you have any questions like, hey, I think that this is a non-reducing  displacement radiologist, you talk to the radiologist about it. Okay, so let's go through this  here. Okay, so here's our brain. Here's our eyeball. That's the lateral pterygoid with the in -  09/01/25   Page   of 13   14

SSC 2.0 - 107: What's That Clicking? Part 1  ferior and superior heads going to the lateral pterygoid there. Some neck muscles, their  ear hole right there.  [0:40:49]  So the condyle, and when the disc is in place on the closed view, it's kind of hard to see  the disc. So you can kind of, because you're like, I think I know what the disc looks like,  and you can kind of make up a story here for, I think I see it. But on the closed view, one of  the aspects of the closed view is it's kind of hard to see the disc. On open, you can see it  better here now, can't you? So that hourglass shape deal that you see between the  condyle and the articular eminence, that is indeed the disc. The back part is thicker, then  we got skinny, and then we got thicker again. That is the disc right there. Moving on to the  side that has the disc out of place. So we have now that black material that's in front of the  condyle. Yes, that's the disc. It's not that hard, is it? So you look at that, and if I wouldn't  have said anything about the black material in front of the condyle, you would have been  like, I'm pretty sure that that's the disc. And then when we open, that gets squished up in  front.  [0:41:46]  So that's a non-reducing displacement. It is extremely rare that it's like, yeah, I have no  idea what's going on. Okay, it is pretty obvious on these MRIs that the disc is non-reduc -  ing, or that the disc is in place. If you went through that and you're like, I can't tell, then the  default would be that it's in place. But usually you'll be able to tell. When it's out of place,  you'll for sure be able to tell. Okay, so this will come with some time. But if you're doing this  for the first time, feel free to post images to the Facebook group. You'll put on there, within  Spencer Study Club, there's literally hundreds and hundreds of hours of experience in  looking at these MRIs. There's thousands of unlocking procedures, which we'll talk about  next here, that have been done amongst your peers. So take advantage of that. Don't just  try to be on your own figuring this out. That's what Spencer Study Club is for, is to help you  actually implement this stuff in your practice.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 14   14

