SSC 2.0 - 110: Dental Sleep Medicine Introduction  SSC 2.0   Level 1  110: Dental Sleep Medicine Introduction  [intro music]  Dental Sleep Medicine - Get Started Saving Lives   [0:00:12]  Welcome to Dental Sleep Medicine. Get started saving lives. Did you start right here be -  cause you're most interested in dental sleep medicine or did you start with 101 that's about  anatomy and all that kind of stuff and now you're doing this in order? However you started,  I don't care. Welcome to Dental Sleep Medicine. If you did start here first, make sure you  go back and learn the anatomy and learn about the kind of basics of TMD because that's  really gonna help you when we talk about avoiding problems and helping people with  problems and things like that. As you will hear me say many times, dental sleep medicine  is the gateway drug into TMD. So if you started here because you're most interested in  dental sleep medicine, welcome and let's get started.  Ted Talk   [0:01:09]  [video playback]  Matt Walker  Thank you very much. Well, I would like to start with testicles. Men who sleep five hours a  night have significantly smaller testicles than those who sleep seven hours or more. In ad -  dition, men who routinely sleep just four to five hours a night will have a level of testos -  terone which is that of someone 10 years their senior. So a lack of sleep will age a man by  a decade in terms of that critical aspect of wellness. And we see equivalent impairments in  female reproductive health caused by a lack of sleep. This is the best news that I have for  you today. From this point, it may only get worse. Not only will I tell you about the wonder -  fully good things that happen when you get sleep, but the alarmingly bad things that hap -  pen when you don't get enough.  [Sleep Apnea - video playback]  [0:03:20]  Dr. Jamison Spencer  So what you just saw there was a dramatization of a sleep apnea event. And the gentle -  man on this screen here, who the dramatization film was made with, happens to look a lot  like this guy who happens to be my father. Here's my father trying to use his CPAP. We'll  talk more about that in a second. Here he is as a baby. Here he is serving in the Korean  09/01/25   Page   of 1   14

SSC 2.0 - 110: Dental Sleep Medicine Introduction  War. And here he is marrying my mom. And a quick story about my dad. My mother  passed away relatively young of cancer. And dad was left on his own. And several years  after mom had passed away, dad decided that he wanted to take a road trip and go from  Boise, Idaho, where he lived and I lived at the time. That's where I grew up, where my  practice was at the time. We still have a practice there in Boise that Dr. Kuehne, my  nephew, runs. And he wanted to go from Boise down to the Salt Lake area, where I hap -  pen to live now, where my brother was living at the time. And this is roughly a five, six-hour  car ride from Boise down to Salt Lake.  [0:04:29]  And we were concerned about dad taking this trip on his own because my brother had had  an experience where he was driving with my dad. My dad was behind the wheel driving.  My brother was in the passenger seat talking to him. And dad actually nodded off at the  wheel while my brother was talking to him. So we were concerned about dad taking this  pretty long trip by himself. And I said, hey, dad, could you wait until I can take you on a  weekend or something, or could we put you on a plane or something like that? And he ba -  sically said, to hell with you kids. I do what I want. So back then, it was required by law, if  you were over 65 years old, you had to drive a light blue Buick LeSabre. And so my dad  got into his light blue Buick LeSabre with the handicap placard and whatnot, and he head -  ed out on this trip. Now, on this little map here, it's not marked, but you have about an hour  and a half outside of Boise is on your way to Salt Lake is a town called Twin Falls.  [0:05:34]  And by the time dad got to Twin Falls, he was feeling a little tired. And so he stopped at a  gas station. He got a Dr. Pepper, drank the Dr. Pepper, walked around for a little bit, and  then got back in the car and went back on his journey. And about 10 minutes later on the  freeway, he fell asleep at the wheel and rolled his Buick LeSabre down the middle of the  freeway four times. Now, he would have died on the scene due to head lacerations, blood  loss, things like that, but there were people there quickly that administered first aid, the  emergency folks got there quickly, and then they life flighted him back to Boise, where he  spent the next week in intensive care. He was intubated, and as that week in intensive  care, as he stabilized and everything, they started trying to take him off the ventilator. And  every time they would try to take him off the ventilator, his blood oxygen saturation would  go down. And so they kept him on the ventilator, and I've never had a tube down my throat  to breathe, but apparently it's uncomfortable, and dad got a little tired of this tube being  down his throat.  [0:06:40]  So eventually he threatened them to get this tube out, and how he threatened them,  'cause it's kind of tough to do that when you've got a tube down your throat, is they gave  him a little board to write on that he could communicate, and he wrote on the board, call  my son, tell him to get our lawyer down here, and get this damn tube out of my throat.  Now, I was the son in that sentence, but I don't know who the lawyer was. We didn't have  a family lawyer or anything like that, but the threat worked. So they took it seriously, and  they got a doctor to come in and talk to my dad. And a lot of ICU doctors are in the ICU,  09/01/25   Page   of 2   14

SSC 2.0 - 110: Dental Sleep Medicine Introduction  you will usually find pulmonologists. Well, a lot of sleep doctors are pulmonologists. And  this pulmonologist in the ICU happened to also be a sleep doctor. And she was a sleep  doctor that I worked with on a regular basis in the Boise area. She asked my dad, Mr.  Spencer, well, she looked first at the history, of course, and saw that he had fallen asleep  at the wheel and had a motor vehicle accident.  [0:07:48]  And that's why he was in the hospital in the first place, that's why he was in intensive care.  And so then she asked, Mr. Spencer, do you snore? And he said, yeah, I snore. She said,  Mr. Spencer, has anyone ever told you that you stop breathing when you sleep? And he  said, yeah, I've been told that. My mom had told him that. And she then said, you know  what? I think you might have sleep apnea. Let's go ahead and get you extubated. We'll get  you in the sleep lab and see if we can tell what's going on. And what you saw the guy on  the dramatization do, my dad did 81 times per hour. Now, you might be thinking, whoa,  that seems like a lot. And indeed, that is a lot. And we'll talk about that here in just a mo -  ment. But dad ultimately went to his grave as a sleep apnea denier. And what I mean by  that is that he didn't really believe he had sleep apnea. You see, during the sleep study,  and he did it in the hospital with all the wires and all the stuff, and in that environment, they  usually ask you to sleep on your back because they are looking for you to be your worst.  [0:09:00]  And you're gonna be your worst when you're on your back, and particularly in REM sleep.  So they will ask patients to try to sleep on their back if they can. And my dad did sleep on  his back, but he said, you know what? I never sleep on my back. At home, I never sleep  on my back. They made me sleep on my back. So that was one thing. He's thinking, yeah,  I don't think that this is valid. Also, there was apparently a brochure that they gave him  about sleep apnea, and it had all these symptoms listed. And he said, I don't have several  of those symptoms. Apparently, he thought maybe you needed to have all those symptoms  in order to actually have the disease, and there was several he didn't have. It's interesting,  he would always comment about how he woke up feeling great and with so much energy,  but if I was to ever swing by in the afternoon or something like that, I would find him often -  times asleep in his lazy boy recliner there. I'm sure you can kind of relate to that, to either  your grandfather or maybe your father.  [0:10:05]  Not uncommon for grandpa or dad to be asleep in the lazy boy. Oftentimes, mom or  grandma is busy working around the house while the guy is asleep, huh? So he was diag -  nosed with sleep apnea. He was put on CPAP, couldn't really use it. And when you don't  have somebody there motivating you to use a treatment like that, compliance really goes  down. He didn't feel any better, so really he felt there was no reason to use it. So he gave  it back. I tried oral appliance therapy. My dad was missing a few teeth, so he had some  partial dentures. It's difficult to make a good oral appliance for somebody if they're missing  teeth. It makes it a little extra bulky in areas. It's difficult for the retention. It's just not as  comfortable. Well, as we'll talk about later in this section, if it's not comfortable, they're  probably not gonna use it. And ultimately, dad woke up having a heart attack. He had a  09/01/25   Page   of 3   14

SSC 2.0 - 110: Dental Sleep Medicine Introduction  heart attack at like 5:00 in the morning. He wasn't running stairs or working out or shovel -  ing snow. He was asleep, probably in REM sleep, or his body was trying to get some REM  sleep. And that was what caused him to have a heart attack.  [0:11:36]  So the reason I start off with this personal story, and there's gonna be other personal sto -  ries as we go along here, is this section of Spencer Study Club, and maybe the reason  you're even here in the first place, is because this is personal. You may personally have an  airway problem. You almost assuredly have someone in your family who does. I'd be  shocked if you don't. That could be a parent, it could be a child, it could be a spouse, it  could be a brother or sister. There's gonna be someone around you, and more than likely  someones around you, that have the issues that we're gonna talk about in this section.  And what's kind of sad is, it often goes undiagnosed, and bad things can happen like a car  accident. Luckily when my dad had his car accident, he didn't hurt anyone else. He  wouldn't have been able to live with himself if he would have caused injury to other people.  He just hurt himself. But that could have definitely gone a different direction. What about  children that it's not picked up on? How does that change the trajectory of their life? So  we're going to dig deep into this, and as we go through this, I want you thinking about your  family, your patients, your team members, the people in your community, because you  possibly are one of the only people that's gonna pick this up in them. Okay, so to start off a  little serious here, this is personal, and you learning here could really, really, really positive -  ly change some lives. And the ripple effects of you changing those lives will go out in ways  that you never will understand completely.  Sleep Cohort - AHI   [0:13:38]  I like to start off with this study that was published quite a number of years ago. And it's  called the Wisconsin Sleep Cohort, and they were looking at comparing groups of people  with sleep apnea who were either treated or untreated. And we'll define some of these  terms here in a minute, but what we're going to see at the bottom of the screen is we have  AHI less than 5. That is considered normal. We'll debate if that's normal or not in just a  second. We have AHI 5 to 15, which is mild. 15 to 30 is moderate, and greater than 30 is  considered severe. My dad's, as I mentioned a second ago, was 81. On the left axis here,  the left-hand side, we have mortality rate, which is, in other words, what percent of people  in the study had passed away at the various stages of this study. So at 5 years, you'll see  these little bars grow up here.  [0:14:31]  We have a few percent of the mild, moderate, severes have passed away. A few percent of  those without sleep apnea passed away. This has been controlled for age, by the way, so  it's not like they started at 90 in this study and then they're 108 at the end of it. They've  controlled for age. Okay, moving on to 10 years, we have a pretty good growth of the mild  09/01/25   Page   of 4   14

SSC 2.0 - 110: Dental Sleep Medicine Introduction  and moderates. Severe stays about the same. 15, a rather dramatic growth or loss of peo -  ple with severe sleep apnea. And at 18 years, when this study was published, over 40% of  those with severe sleep apnea had already died at 18 years. Now, as you go through this,  you might have that kind of phenomenon that they talk about medical students having  where they have every disease that they study. You may find yourself thinking, I think I've  got that, I think I've got that, I think I've got that. You probably won't be there watching this  video thinking, yeah, I bet I have severe sleep apnea. However, I'd like to point your atten -  tion to the difference between our AHI less than 5 bar and the mild to moderate bar.  [0:15:42]  So note that is basically 5% of those without sleep apnea had died in that 18 year period  and roughly 10% with mild sleep apnea, or said a scarier way, you were twice as likely to  die in that period if you had mild sleep apnea versus you didn't have sleep apnea. You had  two times the likelihood of passing away in that 18 year period, just with mild sleep apnea.  And again, we're gonna go into detail on why this happens and things like that and talk  about this, but I start off with this because even mild, which sometimes is kind of like, eh,  do we even need to treat this? I'm not sure. It can absolutely be a death sentence for peo -  ple with mild sleep apnea. And this is just mortality. So this is not symptomatology. Is it  possible that people with mild sleep apnea sometimes are more tired than those with se -  vere sleep apnea? Yes, indeed, that can be the case. So this is mortality. It's not saying  kind of the severity of the disease. I know we call it mild, moderate, and severe 'cause  that's the nomenclature that we've been given in this field.  [0:16:55]  But don't think of it that way. Think that mild, moderate, and severe can all reduce your  lifespan and all will reduce the quality of your life. And that's not a progressive that mild is  only a little bit disruptive, moderate is more, and severe is more. Severe is definitely more  likely to kill you, but mild and moderate can definitely affect your quality of life. And back to  kind of getting you started here in this field, this young lady here is going to be our avatar  as we kind of go through all of this. A younger woman, my friend Jeff Rouse refers to these  people as young fit females. And if she goes in to her doctor and says, hey, doc, I'm just  not feeling well. I'm not sleeping as well as I used to. I don't have energy like I used to. I'm  just kind of down. She's not getting the sleep study. She's gonna get diagnosed with de -  pression, and she's gonna be put on drugs. And if those drugs don't work, then they're  gonna put her on more drugs. And there may be other stuff that goes on. But you are  gonna be looking at things that our medical colleagues aren't gonna look at.  [0:18:14]  And you're gonna look in her mouth, and you're gonna look down her throat, and if you can  see down her throat. And you're gonna ask questions that will take her by surprise, like, do  you snore? And you will more than likely be the one to pick this up in someone who looks  like this, where our medical colleagues, if you're not aware of this already, they are looking  for fat old men when it comes to sleep apnea. Not sleep doctors. Sleep doctors know bet -  ter. But just physicians in general, specialists, primary care doctors, whatever, they're look -  ing more for these fat old men. I want you thinking about your community as you go  09/01/25   Page   of 5   14

SSC 2.0 - 110: Dental Sleep Medicine Introduction  through this, because again, there's a lot of people that are not fat old men in your com -  munity who could be helped. Your eyes might be drawn to the pregnant woman in this pic -  ture. And did you know that in the third trimester that a lot of women experience sleep ap -  nea? And it's typically completely ignored because the OB-GYN will be like, well, that's  gonna get better here pretty quick. That's true. But could there be a problem? Or maybe  put a different way or a better way, could it be more optimal to not have an airway issue  during the third trimester of your pregnancy?  [0:19:30]  I think so. That makes sense. So even with your own family, your children, if you're gonna  have grandkids or something like that, be aware of this stuff. Talk to the pregnant women  in your family and stuff like that. See if they're having problems. My nephew, Dr. Kuehne,  who I mentioned before, runs our Boise practice. He has twins. And when his very thin wife  was pregnant with their twins, she started snoring. And so he fit her with an oral appliance  and it improved her airway. The snoring stopped. And again, had he not done that, would it  have had an effect on his twins? I don't know. But it certainly did not have a negative effect  on his twins helping his wife have a patent airway during that last three months of preg -  nancy. I want you thinking about your team members. And we'll talk about your team as we  go through this a bit too. But that's a great place to start. You care about your team mem -  bers. You work with them every day. You don't want them to be tired. You don't want them  to be fatigued. A lot of your team members might be younger.  [0:20:37]  They may have kids at home and maybe their kids are having problems. Maybe they have  a bed partner who snores and you can help out with that because that's affecting them too.  A great place to start. If you are absolutely a beginner and not someone who's joined  Spencer Study Club and has lots of sleep patients under their belt and you're kind of just  watching this to see if you can grab a couple of pearls. If you are an absolute beginner,  start here. Start with yourself. Start with your family. Start with your team. Start with their  families. And that'll give you enough reps that you will then feel more confident as you un -  leash yourself, if you will, on your patients and your community. And as I just said, start  with yourself. We need you around in order to help other people. I'm here to help you help  more people. And if you aren't here, then I can't help you help more people. So please  start with yourself. Start with your family. Make sure they get the benefit of all of this edu -  cation that you're getting. This is about implementation. You joined Spencer Study Club for  help with implementation, I hope if you joined for education, okay, but education without  implementation is almost a waste of time. You can talk about it at cocktail parties, I sup -  pose, but I really want you out there helping people. So I hope that we will motivate you  and provide the support for you that you feel that you can help people and we've got your  back if there's any problems.  Why We Sleep   [0:22:09]  09/01/25   Page   of 6   14

SSC 2.0 - 110: Dental Sleep Medicine Introduction  Now, the first guy I started off there, the testicles guy, isn't that funny too? So that's at a  TED Talk, right? This isn't at some junior high school. And he's like, I'd like to start with tes -  ticles and the whole crowd, hee, hee, hee, hee. Isn't that kind of funny that even in an  adult-educated forum like a TED Talk that everybody in the crowd is gonna be like, ha, ha,  ha, ha, ha, that's funny, he said testicles. I'll tell you a quick story, though. I teach as part of  the general practice residency at the University of Utah, and I gave this same presentation  there once and start off with that same video, and there was one of the GPR residents who  was just laughing like crazy and like a little bit disruptive to a degree.  [0:22:52]  His other classmates are like, dude, what's your problem and stuff? And he's just laughing  like crazy. And at the end, I had to ask him, I'm like, hey, people will usually laugh at that,  but not to that level. Why did that impact you in that way? And he goes, well, I'm doing re -  search as part of my GPR and stuff, and I just couldn't get out of my head the thought of  who was the research student that had to... The research assistant that had to measure  testicles, that that was their job. Or was there a job posted? It's like, hey, research as -  sistant wanted. Must be good with calipers. So anyway, check out this book. If you haven't  read this, I cannot more strongly encourage you to read this. I learned a ton in this book.  And I've done this a long time. So 25 plus years, I've been in this field. And I've hung out  with John Remmers. I've heard John Remmers speak probably three dozen times. I've  been with Dr. Noah Siegel, is a good friend of mine.  [0:24:01]  Bill Noah is a good friend of mine. The sleep doctor, I work with in Boise. I'm here at the  University of Utah with their sleep community. I've had a lot of experience working with  sleep doctors, being in the sleep medicine community, learning from them up-to-date stuff.  And I still learned a ton from this book, particularly on stage two sleep. This book goes into  detail on what all the cool things are that happen in stage two. My only criticism of Dr.  Walker's work is, and he does, he says in his TED Talk there too, I'll talk about the wonder -  ful things that happen when we sleep and the bad things that happen when we don't. In his  book, he does that too, however. So yes, he's gonna talk about sleep apnea in his book. I  think maybe it would have been as a critique, I guess, of the writing is if the end of every  chapter might have been. And so we just learned about all the amazing things that happen  in stage two sleep. What do you think your brain cares more about?  [0:25:05]  Stage two sleep and all the wonderful things I just wrote about in the past 25 pages, or  air? Probably air. And then he could do the same thing with the REM chapter, and he could  do the same thing with the deep sleep chapter, right? What does your brain care more  about, deep sleep or air? REM sleep or air? Sleep or air? Your brain's prioritizing air 'cause  it knows sleep is really important. Air is kind of more important. You go five, six, seven  minutes without air, we don't have to worry about sleep anymore 'cause obviously you're  dead. That I think I would have liked, and that becomes a little bit of our job here is to,  sleep is so important, right? And if you listen to any health-related podcasts or watch the  09/01/25   Page   of 7   14

SSC 2.0 - 110: Dental Sleep Medicine Introduction  YouTube videos or whatever, it's amazing to me how often sleep is discussed. I fancy my -  self as a bit of an athlete. I'm a mountain bike rider. I kiteboard. I run. I've done some  marathons, qualified for Boston a few years ago, and ran Boston in 2020, which it was  canceled in 2020 due to COVID, so I had to run a virtual Boston marathon.  [0:26:18]  So I did my own marathon here in Utah by myself, so that was really hard actually. Would  have much rather have been in Boston. And every article you read about running, about  lifting weights, about changing your body composition, losing visceral fat, you name it,  they're going to say, hey, well, number one is get your sleep better, okay? And then they're  going to give you all this other stuff, and people will tend to gravitate to the other stuff  sometimes, but sleep, if your sleep is garbage, it's gonna be really tough for you to recover  athletically. It's gonna be tough for your body to release excess fat. It's gonna be tough for  you to be healthy, okay? So anyway, get the book. Great listen, by the way, so this is a  great Audible book, and it's funny 'cause in the Audible book he says, I think actually in the  written book too, he says, a great compliment you can give him is falling asleep reading  his book, 'cause obviously he prioritizes sleep.  Sleep Apnea Definitions   [0:27:20]  All right, let's get into some definitions here, sleep apnea definitions. So apnea is stopping  breathing for 10 seconds or more. Now, I will make the mistake lots of times, and so will  you, that we're going to say things like you stop breathing this many times, okay? And  that's usually not the case, right? So it's not the case that when somebody has an apnea  poppy index that they're stopping breathing. Nevertheless, you will again hear me when I  lecture too, and just as shorthand, if you will, we will say, yeah, in this study the person  stopped breathing or the average as they stopped breathing 12 times an hour or they  stopped breathing 22 times an hour or whatever. Just remember to be smart enough on  that to go, no, they didn't. And I'll cover that in just a second of why that's important. But  apnea is cessation of ventilation for 10 seconds or more. Now, let me in this section too  cover some of the, dumb is probably not nice, a way to characterize it. It could be accu -  rate, but it's not very nice. So I'll just say difficulties with some of these definitions or chal -  lenges with these definitions. So let me pantomime for you an obstructive apnea. I won't  be asleep. I'll be standing up right here.  [0:28:43]  But this is gonna be kind of an obstructive apnea. I'm going to pretend that I'm obstructed  here. So obstruction in my throat here, and I'm going to continue to try to breathe. So you'll  see my abdomen and stomach moving and my chest moving. And so I'm going to show  you an apnea, okay, an awake apnea. No such thing, but I'm gonna show you, I think you'll  understand. Okay, here we go. Okay, see how many I counted on my fingers there? Nine.  Okay, that apnea I just did right there for you didn't count. What do you mean it didn't  09/01/25   Page   of 8   14

SSC 2.0 - 110: Dental Sleep Medicine Introduction  count, Jamison? Well, it wasn't 10 seconds. Apnea is stopping breathing for 10 seconds or  more. A nine-second apnea doesn't count. An eight-second apnea doesn't count. Think  about that. Now, what if the person holds their breath for a minute? If you were to count  the apneas, how many apneas would you count if someone stopped breathing for 60 sec -  onds in a row? One. On the other hand, if in, say, a five-minute period, someone stopped  breathing, so let me give you this. In a five-minute period, you have patient A, and they  stop breathing within that five minutes twice for 60 seconds.  [0:30:26]  So their apnea index, the number of apneas counted in that five-minute period would be  two. Patient B stops breathing during that five-minute period eight times 15 seconds at a  time. So they only stop breathing for 15 seconds, but they do it eight times in that five min -  utes. So which is worse, eight or two? Well, the way I just did that is they both added up to  two minutes of stopped breathing in that five minutes, but one would score eight events  during that five minutes, and the other one scored only two events. Which do you think  seems worse, to stop breathing and do that for 60 seconds or for 15 seconds before your  body gets on board? Probably the 60 seconds, right? So this becomes one of our jobs, ac -  tually, is to look at how long are the apneas. Usually it won't score apneas below 10 sec -  onds. You'd have to get into the details of the report, the raw data of the report to even see  those. So keep that in mind. And here's a little pearl for you. The younger and healthier  you are, the quicker your body reacts to an apnea and does something about it.  [0:32:01]  So if you're young and healthy and you stop breathing within a few seconds, your brain's  like, this is no fun. Let's make this person breathe again. So if your brain's able to do that  in nine seconds or less, no apneas for you. You follow? So sometimes these mild apneas  that we're gonna talk about in a minute, they might be having a lot of these sub-definitional  apneas or hypopneas, as we'll talk about now. Okay? Keep that in mind. That's a big deal.  And as we treat people, I'm kind of giving you a fire hose here 'cause I'm a little bit all over  the place, but it's important you understand this in the foundation here. Oftentimes, we'll  take patients that have an AHI of whatever, and we treat them with oral appliance therapy,  and let's say their AHI goes from 30 to 20. And you're like, oh, man, that kind of sucks.  That's not very good. But what if they had more apneas that were shorter? Is that apples  and oranges, or is that apples and apples? Is that different? It seems different, right? So  they have apneas, still have apneas, but they've gone from 45 seconds to 20 seconds.  [0:33:23]  That seems like maybe important. So they could have scored more because they're short -  er. Does that make sense? Or, so I'll talk about in just a second here, maybe they had  more hypopneas. So I'll get to that next. Hypopnea, 30 to 50% reduction in airflow for 10  seconds or more. A 30 to 50% reduction in airflow for less than 10 seconds doesn't count.  That doesn't get scored as a hypopnea. The apnea hypopnea index is how many apneas  and how many hypopneas happen per hour of sleep. That is your apnea hypopnea index,  or AHI. So let me give you another math problem here. So patient A has 30 apneas per  hour of sleep, by definition, so more than 10 seconds, stopping breathing, 30 apneas per  09/01/25   Page   of 9   14

SSC 2.0 - 110: Dental Sleep Medicine Introduction  hour of sleep, and zero hypopneas per hour of sleep. So that person's AHI would be what?  I'd have to rewind that, see what I said again. I didn't make this hard math. 30 apneas per  hour plus zero hypopneas per hour equals 30. AHI of 30, severely bad. Patient B has zero  apneas per hour plus 30 hypopneas per hour equals AHI of 30. Okay, are those different  patients? One stops breathing literally 30 times per hour for 10 seconds or more.  [0:35:10]  The other one stops breathing how often? Never. They only have hypopneas. Okay, this is  critical that you get this because oftentimes, at least our patients tell us, we are the first  ones to go over the sleep study with the patient. I don't think that's true. I'm sure that the  sleep doctors or their nurse practitioner or their physician assistant do go over the sleep  study, but I think the patient forgets. And remember, we're also dealing with people that are  sleep deprived, probably not getting good REM sleep, probably have memory issues, stuff  like that. So not uncommon for them to be like, hey, no one's ever explained this before.  But so what I do when I go over this with a patient is I'll have their sleep study. They're  usually on paper. You could just have this, you could have literally what I'm about to do on  a laminated thing in your office and you could have this on here and just draw on it and  then be able to erase, use whiteboard marker or something and then erase this 'cause it's  gonna be the same for every patient, basically. So what I do is I've got their paper here  and then I say, hey, remember in your sleep study, you had like the thing on your finger,  you had the thing on your chest, and then you had something in your nose.  [0:36:21]  You had a little cannula. Normally when you see those cannulas, that's giving someone  oxygen. In your case, it was not giving you oxygen. What it was doing is it was measuring  airflow. When you would breathe in and out, it would measure that airflow. So I then draw  on their piece of paper there. So on the computer, would it look like this? In, out, in, out. I'll  do this to the camera. In, out, in, out, in, out. And then if you stop breathing, it goes flat.  Okay, so an apnea is in, out, in, out, in, out, flat. And then I'll say, you did that 30 times  throughout the night. Then I'll say, and then the other thing they're looking for is something  called a hypopnea. That looked like this. In, out, in, out, in, out, and then shallow breath -  ing, a 30 to 50% reduction in your airflow. In, out, in, out, in, out, shallow breathing, 30 to  50% reduction. You did that 180 times throughout the night. So you had 210 events  throughout the entire night, but only 30 of them throughout the entire night were apneas.  And usually the patient will be like, oh my gosh, that makes so much sense.  [0:37:43]  Because they were told, and again, we all tend to make this mistake, that they stopped  breathing. So let me try to use math on the fly here with the example I just gave you there.  So if they had 210 events, let's put that over seven hours so I can do the math easily,  which would be 30 events per hour. Okay, seven times 30 I think is 210. So that person  would be told they have severe sleep apnea and that they stopped breathing 30 times per  hour. And then they go home and they say, hey, wife of 30 years, they say there at the  sleep doc's office that I stopped breathing 30 times an hour. And she says, no, you don't.  And the guy's like, what do you mean? I thought you said I stopped breathing. Oh, you  09/01/25   Page   of 10   14

SSC 2.0 - 110: Dental Sleep Medicine Introduction  stopped breathing, but not 30 times an hour. You might stop breathing, oh, 30 times a  night. And sidebar, for real, women are really good at this. If their husband, their male bed  partner is stopping breathing, they're usually taking notes, at least in their head. I don't  know that they're doing it physically, like, okay, Jamison stops breathing on average 12  times per hour, usually 18 to 23 seconds per time.  [0:39:01]  Okay, they're taking detailed notes. For us guys, usually we're pretty good at being like,  she snores or she doesn't. That's about as detailed as we get. So I would not be surprised  at all if a woman was like, yeah, actually you stopped breathing about 30 times throughout  the night. And that would be dead on based on our objective data. But you get my point? If  the patient goes home and says, hey, wife of 30 years, they say I stopped breathing 30  times an hour. And she's like, no, not even close. Then he's like, ah, see, this thing's a  whole big hoax. It's a big scam. They just want me on one of those machines. They want  me doing this. They want me to get that Inspire thing. This is important that you go over  this. 'Cause in my experience, the patients will almost always say, oh, I didn't really under -  stand that before. Yeah, they told me that I stopped breathing 22 times an hour. Like, well,  actually you stopped breathing four times an hour and you have this hypopnea thing 18  times an hour. Oh yeah, totally, that makes sense. Okay, so please, please, please start  doing that if you're not already.  [0:40:06]  And again, if you are making the mistake with your patient, so again, when I'm talking to  you, and if I say something like stop breathing, that's shorthand for they had an AHI, right?  But with my patients, I never do that. So with my patients, I'm going to be specific on how  many times they stopped breathing and how many times they had shallow breathing,  okay? Now, note on apnea hypopnea index. The guy who came up with this is a guy  named Christian Guilleminault. He passed away around 2021, I think-ish. Maybe actually  before that now that I think about it, but around there, you can Google it. And I had the  honor of working with Christian Guilleminault several times. So we taught a mini residency  at University Pacific in San Francisco and he was at Stanford and he was kind enough to  come and be part of our meeting. And I'll never forget, he's lecturing to group of dentists,  30 some dentists or whatever. And he says, "coming up with AHI is the biggest disap -  pointment of my career". Huh, weird. Why would he say that? And he went on to explain  that he didn't really anticipate that AHI would become the thing that everything got focused  on, that the other researchers just focused on AHI and that ultimately the guidelines were  written based on AHI and the insurance policies were all written on AHI and everything be -  came about AHI. To use a term of today, AHI went viral.  [0:41:46]  They didn't expect it to. He never kind of sat down or him and the other people that came  up with this stuff, that discovered it, if you will, or more importantly or better said, defined it,  'cause sleep apnea has been around a long time. Sidebar, sleep apnea was originally  called Pickwickian syndrome, which was named after a character in Dickens' novel and  the character was called Joe the Fat Boy. And that was in the Pickwickian papers, was the  09/01/25   Page   of 11   14

SSC 2.0 - 110: Dental Sleep Medicine Introduction  organization there that was in the novel. And so the erudite, well-read doctors that came  up with this syndrome in the '50s referred to it as Pickwickian syndrome and then later it  became obstructive sleep apnea. But they, again, the reason I point that out is 1800s, it  would be Dickens' writing, and they had sleep apnea then. And I'm sure as you go back in  time that where there was obesity, there was sleep apnea. Now we have sleep apnea  without obesity for other reasons that we'll talk about more. But the bummer is, is this has  been the focus. And it is important, I started off with the thing showing you that if you have  an AHI over 30, you're way more likely to die than if you have an AHI below five.  [0:43:16]  But just keep in mind how this is recorded. Keep in mind that if you have an apnea or hy -  popnea below 10 seconds, it didn't count. Keep in mind that having a bunch of short ap -  neas counts more than having long apneas and that that can then skew the data a bit  when you are getting follow-up studies with your oral appliance 'cause maybe you are in -  deed helping them. They are reacting, their apneas are shorter, but shorter apneas count  more. There's more. There can be more short apneas than long apneas in the same  amount of time. Make sense? Okay, so think that through. Make sure your patients under -  stand that. Make sure you understand that 'cause if you do a follow-up study with some -  body and the sleep doctor is just kind of like, eh, see, didn't really work that well, only went  from 25 to 20, it's going to be up to you, and I'll talk about this later in level two, about go -  ing through that sleep study with kind of a fine-tooth comb to be like, yeah, but did you no -  tice here, doctor, that the patient slept on their back the entire time with the oral appliance  in their mouth and they never slept on their back in the baseline study? Do you think that  could have something to do with it? And that'll be kind of up to you to point those things  out.  Apnea Hypopnea Index (AHI)   [0:44:30]  Now, a normal apnea-hypopnea index, so-called, is less than five per hour, and this ap -  plies to adults, and an adult is defined as over 18. So if a child, if a pediatric patient, has  an abnormal AHI, it is an AHI of one is all they have to have. So it doesn't take much for a  kiddo to have obstructive sleep apnea that is like, well, we should do something about this.  So an AHI of one or two or three, all they need, whereas if you're over 18 years old, then  you need to have above five. Many insurance companies won't pay for treatment of sleep  apnea unless, if you have mild AHI, five to 15, unless you have something else wrong. As  we get to screening and some of the forms that we use and stuff like that, I'll talk about  that. And our form that you'll have in Spencer Study Club that you can adopt or change to  whatever suits you. On it has questions like, are you sleepy during the day?  [0:45:37]  And we give them the upward sleepiness scale. And do you have a mood disorder? And  have you been diagnosed with depression? Things like that, because there's some things  09/01/25   Page   of 12   14

SSC 2.0 - 110: Dental Sleep Medicine Introduction  that insurance companies want to know in order to treat someone with mild sleep apnea.  But let's address the normal being below five here for a second. So imagine that you have  a dog and imagine that you just adore this dog. I have two dogs myself and I do love my  dogs most of the time. Anyway, I have a lab, a white lab, and I have a Irish golden doodle.  Okay, the lab is named powder as in powder snow. And the Irish golden doodle is named  Lucky. So Lucky and Powder, and let's say that Lucky and Powder start waking my wife  and I up every night, four times a night. Okay, excuse me, not four times a night. I mis -  spoke. Four times an hour. So every 15 minutes or so, they're barking, carrying on, waking  us up. What would... If you were in that situation, what would you do? Now if you're not a  dog lover, you're probably already getting rid of the dogs. Like an easy decision for you.  [0:46:58]  But let's say that you really cared about these dogs. Let's say that you had family mem -  bers that really cared about these dogs. You would probably be less inclined to just get rid  of them. But let's say everything you try, you're putting them in another room, you're  putting them in the garage, you're doing whatever you can, and they are just carrying on,  barking, whining so loud. You even try earplugs and it doesn't matter. Every 15 minutes  you're getting woken up. How quick before you get rid of those dogs? Pretty quick, right?  Probably within a few weeks. If you take them to the vet, you do everything you can and  it's just not gonna stop. At a pretty quick point, you're like, I can't do this anymore. I can't  not sleep anymore. Okay, why did I use every 15 minutes? Because every 15 minutes  would be four times an hour. So think of it this way. If your AHI is four, if you are having  your sleep disturbed up to four times per hour, that's considered normal. But you putting  yourself through that scenario I just gave you there, you're thinking, I would feel like crap if  that happened.  [0:48:12]  I would not be able to function. If I had a child or somebody or I was traveling and if I was  going to a Spencer Study Club course and I was getting woken up every 15 minutes dur -  ing the night, the next day I wouldn't go. I would stay at the hotel and I would sleep for  hours until I felt rested enough to be able to function. Here's my point. You're gonna have  patients, plenty of them, that have an AHI less than five. And they're gonna be told that  that's normal, that they're fine. No, it's not normal. It's common. Okay, there's a difference  between common and normal. This is one of the problems with epidemiological studies.  You take a whole group of people and you look at stuff and they're like, oh, check it out. All  these people seem to have this. Now, I think it's a big leap to be like, and so therefore it's  normal. So we could say right now that in the United States, it is normal to be obese. Is it  or is it common? I would say it's common. I would definitely say it's not normal.  [0:49:23]  All right. So take the whole normal, should have an asterisk by it here, less than five  events per hour. That is the definition. Question the definition. And help your patients un -  derstand this, 'cause their doctor is gonna be like, oh, check it out. Yeah, your AHI is 3.6.  You're normal. Anything below five is normal. And they're gonna be like, okay, is that like a  blood test or something like that? I'm in that normal range. Okay, that's what they're gonna  09/01/25   Page   of 13   14

SSC 2.0 - 110: Dental Sleep Medicine Introduction  think. Like, oh, okay, that's like a blood test. So normal is 3.6. Great. Okay, cool. Good for  me, man. And then if you use that analogy, like I just did of being woken up 3.6 times per  hour, disturbed sleep 3.6 times an hour, they're gonna get a lot better. Mild is considered  five to 15. And this starts to get a little ridiculous too, doesn't it? When I use kind of the dog  analogy there, and then you start putting these numbers on there. Like imagine, moderate  16 to 30 events an hour, severe over 30. My dad's case, 81 times per hour when he was  on his back in the sleep lab anyway, more than once a minute. Okay, that's a lot. That's a  lot of getting your sleep screwed up. But these are the definitions. All right. So those are all  historical current definitions.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 14   14

