SSC 2.0 - 112: Snoring & Sleep Apnea  SSC 2.0   Level 1  112: Snoring & Sleep Apnea  [intro music]  Airway Anatomy   [0:00:12]  [video playback]  So let's talk a little bit about airway anatomy. So here on the left, we have our open pha -  ryngeal airway, so a patent airway. And then on the right, we have our blocked or our ob -  structed airway. And basically how this works is we have, as the dramatization video  shows, we have an open airway. This is held open by reflex when we're awake, when we  go to sleep, this can relax, the jaw, can fall back. Your muscle tone goes away. In REM  sleep, we can have a complete blockage of the airway. Brain doesn't like that, wakes us  up. Okay, so that is kind of it in a nutshell. Now, let me also kind of go over some anatomy,  if you will, of sleep apnea, snoring, and hypopneas, and using just kind of my hand as an  example of this. So I would say this is our open airway. This is your airway during the day  when it's being held open reflexively for you and all of the people that you see. So that's an  open airway. That this represents an open airway. The first thing that we would have typi -  cally would be as that starts to restrict and is fluttering around a little bit, we would typically  have snoring.  [0:01:34]  So you could have someone with a restricted airway where they are snoring, and then the  next step down the constriction there, would be a hypopnea. So this is our 30 to 50% re -  duction in airflow. And why is it reduced? Well, it's reduced because that airway is being  constricted. So that would be a hypopnea. And then if the airway completely is restricted,  completely obstructs, that's an obstructive sleep apnea. Okay, so once again, open snor -  ing, hypopnea, obstruction to go the other direction. Obstruction, hypopnea, snoring, open.  Now, why do I spend time talking about that? Well, obviously, 'cause I want you to teach  your patients this too, but also to point out what is the last thing that goes away before an  open airway, and what's the first thing to appear as we go from open airway one way on  the continuum or the other way. So if we call it open airway to obstructive sleep apnea,  what's the first step here? Snoring. And as we go from obstructive sleep apnea to open  airway, what's the last step? Snoring. That's important because as we're gonna talk about  in level two, snoring is really what I want you focusing on.  [0:03:12]  And we're gonna talk about that here in a minute too. With screening your patients snor -  ing, how come? Because if the patient's snoring, that doesn't mean they have sleep ap -  nea, but it's a step on that journey towards the having hypopneas and apneas. And if  you're treating the patient, if their snoring has been eliminated, how likely is it that they  6/17/25   Page   of 1   15

SSC 2.0 - 112: Snoring & Sleep Apnea  have hypopneas and apnea still very unlikely, as a matter of fact. So that's kind of awe -  some because it allows us to objectively measure with something like snore lab, which I'll  talk about here in a second. But we're able to even from their bed partner what not. Yeah,  snoring is much better now. Well, virtually guaranteed. So are the apneas and hypopneas.  If the snoring is better. And like I've already discussed, that can be a little bit confusing be -  cause of how apneas are scored and how hypopneas are scored and if the apneas are  shorter than your   AHI could still be kind of high because you went from long apneas to  shorter apneas and all that kind of stuff. But in reality, if you have a patient and their snor -  ing is better, their airway is better.  Normal vs Obstructed   [0:04:20]  Okay. So I hope that makes sense to you. The view on the left here is looking in the pa -  tient's throat from a dentist's point of view. So I use these pictures and many of you may  have heard me speak before. And the title of that lecture where you may have first met me  might have been the Dentist's Role in Sleep Related Breathing Disorders. Looking beyond  the Teeth and Saving Lives. That's a little subtitle of my lecture that I do around the world.  Looking beyond the Teeth and Saving Lives. This is the view of a dentist. There's the  teeth, there's the pearly white things. And really all I want dentists to do is just look a cou -  ple centimeters farther back. Can you see down the throat? What's the tongue looking  like? And then if you can't see down the throat, then maybe you ask that question, do you  snore? That's really as simple as it is. If we could do that, if we could accomplish. 'Cause  remember in dental school, did they have you do this? Of course they didn't. Are they to -  day, in 2025? No. Maybe a couple dental schools in the country where there's someone  like me, or someone like you that's interested in this and you've gone.  [0:05:38]  And, I teach at the GPR here at the University of Utah. So maybe some of those dentists  maybe start to think about this a little bit. But what if that started going forward, that all  dentists were trained to just look beyond the teeth and ask a couple questions? The im -  pact would be massive. And now let's talk a bit more about snoring. As I use that segue as  snoring is gonna be kind of your first step towards the obstructive apnea. And then it's  gonna be the last step if we're treating the person with obstructive apnea.  Does Snoring and Sleep Apnea Affect the Bed Partner’s Sleep?   [0:06:13]  So let's talk about snoring. In and of itself, is snoring a problem? Well, I think from this pic -  ture here that Mrs. Megaphonehead would certainly say it's a problem. And that begs the  question, does snoring and sleep apnea affect the bed partner's sleep? Now, immediately  you're gonna be like, yes, it does. And depending on how vigorous your yes, it does. De -  6/17/25   Page   of 2   15

SSC 2.0 - 112: Snoring & Sleep Apnea  pends on does your bed partner's snoring or sleep apnea affect your sleep? If it does,  you're gonna wanna perk up right here.  [0:06:50]  And you're about to be rather disappointed in this information I'm about to share with you.  So there was a great study done long time ago at Mayo Clinic, and the researchers set out  to answer this question. Does sleeping next to someone with snoring and sleep apnea im -  pact the person without snoring and sleep apnea's sleep? And they took 10 married cou -  ples and they brought them into the sleep lab there and they're all wired up, both of them  and left in the same bed. And these again were married couples. These weren't people  that never met before or something like that. These were people who were used to sleep -  ing in the same bed together and they studied them simultaneously and here's what they  found. So I'll read this results. The patients, all male, demonstrated a median apnea hy -  popnea index of 26. So there's the range 3 to 75. That decreased to 7, 0 to 34 during the  trial of nasal CPAP therapy. Okay, so said another way, this was what's called a split night  study. So the first part of the study was to see if they had sleep apnea or not. And they all  did. And then the second part of the study was they woke him up, put them on a CPAP  machine and then had them go back to sleep.  [0:08:11]  Okay, so that's what a split night study is. Moving forward here. During the CPAP trial, the  median arousal index of the spouses decreased from 21, 14 to 34 was the range there to  12, 4 to 27. And the spouse's median sleep efficiency increase from 74% on average to  87% on average. Okay, so let me kind of dissect those numbers a little bit here. So up at  the top we had 26, the average AHI was 26 and the average arousal index was 21. So the  guys, okay, remember I told you I would use this term sometimes incorrectly, but you un -  derstand now, after everything we've talked about, 26 times they stopped breathing, 21  times their spouse woke up. Okay, that's not exactly correct, but there was a disturbance  in their sleep. Now once they got put on the CPAP, that 26 went down to 7 and that 21  went down to 12. Immediately, just after having the CPAP on a little bit, they got better,  which makes sense, but so did their bed partner get better. The sleep efficiency, which is  how much time you are actually asleep versus awake, went from 74%. So the first half of  the night, 26% of the time the spouse was awake to 87%.  [0:09:44]  So only 13% or half as much time awake once their husband was put on CPAP. The au -  thors go on to say the elimination of snoring and OSA in these patients was associated  with an improvement in the quality of their bed partner's sleep. Skipping down a little bit.  Assuming that 480 minutes or 8 hours were spent in bed for sleep, a 13% improvement in  sleep efficiency translates to an additional 62 minutes of sleep per night for the spouses of  snorers with OSA. Holy cow. How many of you would almost kill for an extra hour of sleep  a night? Well, now you know who to kill. Just kidding. Don't go kill your spouse because  they're snoring. Get them an oral appliance instead and that will help your sleep. Okay?  And this is a really big deal. So you remember back in the day when people would smoke  everywhere and some of you are old enough to remember, smoking, non-smoking and  6/17/25   Page   of 3   15

SSC 2.0 - 112: Snoring & Sleep Apnea  stuff like that. Many of you are not old enough to remember that because we got rid of it.  So now, you never hear the phrase, would you like the smoking or the non-smoking sec -  tion?  Second Hand Sleep Apnea   [0:10:52]  That's not a thing anymore. There's relatively limited places that people can smoke indoors  nowadays. So secondhand smoke, we decided that was bad. Well, I am on a mission to  get rid of what I call second hand sleep apnea. Second hand sleep apnea is terrible. There  are millions and millions of people that are suffering from second hand sleep apnea. And  here's the crazy part. As you just saw in that Mayo clinic study from 1999, this isn't new  data, right? That's decades old that we've known this. But I would be stunned if almost  anywhere there's a medical doctor that would have a woman in and talking about their  sleep and how they feel and their energy levels and stuff like that and that they would ask  the question, curious, does your bed partner snore? Does your bed partner have sleep  apnea? That is not typically something that's asked when a family history or something like  that is asked. It's does your mom have cancer or did she have cancer? Does your dad  have heart disease? It's not, does your bed partner snore? Too bad, right? So I believe  that there are millions of people that this is being missed and if just this was taken care of,  it would make a massive difference in their life.  [0:12:16]  So here's a more recent study. The Mayo Clinic was 99. This is 2017. Impact of obstructive  sleep apnea, its treatments on partners. A literature review. So this is another meta analy -  sis where they kind of looked at a bunch of stuff. Here's what they found. The majority of  studies found untreated OSA to have a negative impact on partners. Objective and subjec -  tive sleep and daytime functioning in particular mood, quality of life, relationship quality.  Improvements in partner assessed sleep quality were reported for CPAP, oral appliance  therapy and surgery. Get this article, print it out. This is something you need to be sharing  with your patients 'cause as you start looking beyond the teeth and saving lives, you will  have the patient which you're like, hey do you snore? You might just start screening every -  body. Talk in a minute about the American Dental association asking all of us to screen for  sleep related breathing disorders. So you might just start doing that as a rule with all of  your patients. Why wouldn't you? And you're gonna have the patient that sometimes will  say, well, no, you're talking to the wrong person. You should be talking to my husband.  [0:13:25]  And then you'll have others that just don't say that, but it looks like they're tired or you see  that they're on an antidepressant or whatever. And you can then ask curious do you have  a bed partner? Yes. Does your bed partner snore? Yeah. What does that have to do with  anything? Well, because it could be massively screwing up your sleep, your health, your  quality of life. Interesting here that they put relationship in there too, which makes sense.  6/17/25   Page   of 4   15

SSC 2.0 - 112: Snoring & Sleep Apnea  And if you're sleep deprived, you're not gonna have as much energy to have a good rela -  tionship. So this is all kind of awful, right? So let's be on a mission. Join me on my mission  to wipe out second hand sleep apnea.  Not so Benign Snoring   [0:14:10]  Snoring in and of itself is not benign. So snoring has been associated with increased  carotid artery arteriosclerosis. The theory behind that is that literally the noise, the vibra -  tions of the snoring will cause turbulence in the carotid arteries and that can increase arte -  riosclerosis. A study back in 2011 showed that just people who snore are more likely to die,  so all cause mortality. And again, that kind of makes sense because their sleep is probably  disturbed to a degree, even if they are just  [0:14:45]  So this whole idea of benign snoring, I'm not sure there is such a thing. Snoring affects the  sleep of the snorer and of their bed partner. And let's talk about that of the snorer for a  second. You are more likely to have a restriction of your airway in what stage of sleep?  REM sleep. Why? Because of that reduced muscle tone. And then, of course, on your  back. Okay, so here's something curious that you may have experienced personally. Have  you ever had your bed partner there? Or maybe you're sharing a room with somebody  even, and they're snoring and you say, hey, roll over. You're snoring. And they say, no, I'm  not. And just like that fast, they're like, no, I'm not. And you're like, no, yeah, you are.  What's up with that? Why would one. Why would they respond instantly if they're asleep?  And why do they reject the idea or disagree that they were snoring? Well, here's the thing.  During sleep, our brain filters out stuff that's not important. So certain noises are not going  to bring your brain up to the level of paying attention to it. And the more common the nois -  es are, then the less your brain's it's gonna worry about it.  [0:16:29]  I've heard stories from friends of mine, like Colonel Neal, Colonel Philip Neal, who's a  sleep dentist in the army. He talks about when he was in Afghanistan, if I remember cor -  rectly, that he was in an area in his barracks where he was sleeping and stuff. They had  this fire pit thing. So as guys were leaving the compound there, as they were leaving the  post, they would have their big mounted 50 cals, and they would shoot off a couple rounds  into this pit and to make sure that everything was functioning appropriately. So literally  multiple times throughout the night, he gets a, you know, right relatively close to where he  was sleeping. And at first it was disturbing, and then after a while, he didn't even notice.  And then he kind of got home and it was kind of like too quiet. His brain got used to this  level of noise in the background. But again, even in that relatively loud environment there,  his brain realized that this was not something he needed to worry about. This happens  when people have a baby. The baby cry will wake you up. It's interesting, too, as a guy  who's has six children.  6/17/25   Page   of 5   15

SSC 2.0 - 112: Snoring & Sleep Apnea  [0:17:51]  Jenny was far more tuned in to the baby crying. And there would be many times, much to  her chagrin, that get up in the morning or whatever and hey, how'd you sleep? Or some -  thing. And she would kind of look at me like, what do you mean? How I slept? I was up  with a baby three or four times, and I was oh, sorry, I didn't hear that. So not only did I not  hear the baby, I didn't hear her get out of bed or any of the noise that was going on with  that, 'cause my brain was like, you don't need to worry about that. On the other hand, if  Jenny was out of town and I was home alone with the little kids, then I would be attuned to  this. My brain would be all right, this is important. We're in charge here, so we better be  aware of that noise. Back to snoring. Here's the point. The snorer will ignore their own  snoring. Their brain doesn't tune in to their snoring as a problem because it's their snoring.  The brain's right there.  [0:18:45]  It knows, hey, this noise coming from me, cool. We're safe. We're good. I really don't need  to pay attention to this. So there you go. If you didn't know that already, this is important  also to explain to your patients who won't know this for sure. And it's why it can be very  frustrating for people to prove to people that they're snoring because the snorer will deny  that they ever snore. Speaking of snoring, my friend Jim o' Brien, who's a really awesome  sleep doctor in the Boston area, says everyone who snores will eventually have sleep ap -  nea. And actually, the end of this sentence is if they live long enough. Okay? So if you're a  snorer, it's going to progress as you get floppier and older. So snoring in and of itself, bot -  tom line, not benign. Something to be considered, something to look at. Now, what about  the patient who says, well, I don't know if I snore. The dog doesn't tell me. First of all,  shouldn't be sleeping with the dog in the bed. That's going to disturb your sleep, too. But  the point is, if the patient is not sure because they don't have a vet partner, or if it's a sce -  nario, like I said before, it's hey, my husband does not believe that he snores.  Snore Lab   [0:19:56]  Well, good news. There's an app for that, and it's called Snore Lab. Now, they have a free  version that will give you a little bit of data, but I strongly encourage you to make this a ma -  jor part of your practice. I was around when this first was developed and actually reached  out to the company at first and whatnot and had some conversations with them. But this is  a great product. It's like, maybe, I don't know, 10 bucks a month or something like that. Or  you can, it's 30 bucks for the whole year or something like that. Don't quote me on that fee,  but it's something around there. But the cool thing is, as I just explained, what goes away  kind of last when you're treating sleep apnea? Snoring. So the apneas are gone first, the  hypopneas are gone next, and then it's snoring as last. So if you are tracking their snoring  and the snoring is getting significantly better, clearly their apneas and hypopneas are get -  6/17/25   Page   of 6   15

SSC 2.0 - 112: Snoring & Sleep Apnea  ting better. So that's pretty awesome. This lives on their phone. You don't have to buy a  $5,000 home sleep test or whatever. You don't have to have $100 per use fee.  [0:21:00]  You just use their phone. They use their phone. And what I recommend that you do is you  say, hey, patient, we got your scans today. We're gonna get you back in a few days or a  few weeks to get you fit with your oral Appliance. Do me a favor. Download this app. It's  gonna cost you a couple bucks. It's gonna be well worth it. Download this app, and then  you're going to immediately start using this to get a baseline record of what is the level of  snoring that you have. I taught a course this past weekend, and it was funny 'cause I men -  tioned this on day one. So one of the attendees used it that night. Actually, several of them  did. And this one guy raises his hand the next day. He's hey, that blew my mind, 'cause I  don't really think I snore. And I got the app there, and as you see on this readout here, it's  got all these different markings, all these levels, and quiet, light, loud, epic, and how long  the person made those noises. So you can tap on one of those big high bars for the loud  or epic, and it will replay the snore.  [0:22:07]  Okay? So it's recording throughout the night, coming up with this data. And the patient  themselves, or with their spouse or bed partner, they can tap and. Oh, my gosh, are you  kidding me? That's me. So that is pretty freaking cool. And this dentist that took my course  was like yeah, I had no idea. So he's really excited to treat himself 'cause he had no idea  the level of snoring that he had. Crazy, right? Okay, so great tool. Get the baseline data.  And then once they start using their oral appliance and there's things in the app that treat -  ments and if they were using nasal dilators or Afrin or mouth tape or whatever, you'd be  able to track that. They would be able to track that and see if they're making a difference.  Also a great tool because they can do this on a regular basis. And see if, when they eat  late at night, does that make a difference? If they exercise, does that make a difference? If  they drink alcohol before bed, does that make a difference? All these different things to  help them understand that there's a heck of a lot more going on than just wearing a piece  of plastic at night.  Sleep Apnea - Types   [0:23:13]  Now let's move into sleep apnea. There are two main types of sleep apnea. Obstructive  and central. Obstructive is basically what we're always talking about. It is an obstruction in  the upper airway, and you are trying to breathe. Chest, abdomen moving, lots of effort,  nothing getting through. That's an obstructive apnea. So again, here you see that they're  asleep and that the airflow is going, and then it's flat. Remember me talking about that  chest wall movement continues. That's an obstructive event. Central apnea, on the other  hand, is you're asleep and you stop trying to breathe. So the effort goes away. This is not a  obstructive event. Now, when I first started lecturing in this field, I would say all the time, if  6/17/25   Page   of 7   15

SSC 2.0 - 112: Snoring & Sleep Apnea  you got a patient with central apnea, you can't treat them. Oral appliance therapy is not  gonna help them. So, you need to avoid anyone with central sleep apnea. Then we treated  multiple people with central sleep apnea. The first one was actually a bit of a mistake. So  there's something called central emergent sleep apnea. And that is, or treatment emergent  central sleep apnea, where somebody with obstructive sleep apnea is put on CPAP and  that induces in them central apnea.  [0:24:40]  One of the theories behind that is because that air, and it's just room air, right? But it's be -  ing pushed into them and maybe that affects their baroreceptors. So they're just kind of  like the baroreceptor is like, you know what? I think we're fine on the air here. We don't re -  ally need to breathe. And so they'll have all these central events. And sometimes those  people get put on something called a bipap first with different pressures and then some -  times a ventilatory pap. So something that's actually breathing for them. Quite uncomfort -  able, I'm told. Difficult for most people to use and bit of a bummer, right? So you don't want  these treatment emergence centrals to happen. Well, what had happened is somebody  had that had a whole boatload of centrals. And the physician's assistant referred him to us.  And this was from a main sleep doctor that we worked with in the Boise area. And I kind of  looked at the report and like, oh, whoa, this is kind of weird. Normally we don't treat people  with a ton of central sleep apnea. But I was like, but this is sent from my main sleep doctor.  I'm not gonna question it.  [0:25:43]  He's told me to fit this person with an oral appliance, give it a whirl. And with oral appliance  therapy, their AHI and their centrals went to zero. And I'll never forget this sleep doctor ac -  tually presented this at a sleep doctor conference at a grand rounds. And his slide was like  oral appliance for central sleep apnea. Wtf. And then he kind of talked about what had  happened in this case and whatnot. So here's the bottom line. As of the time that I'm  recording this, you don't worry about central sleep apnea at all. Now it's there. Central  sleep apnea. So far and I've asked sleep doctors this if central sleep apnea ever exists  completely by itself. So if you ever see a patient and they only have central apneas, okay,  then that's a massive check in the weird column and you would talk to the doctor about  that because CPAP or oral appliance is not gonna change the brain not trying to breathe.  You're probably never gonna see that in your whole career though. What you're gonna see  is a person with mostly obstructive sleep apnea with some centrals in our massive experi -  ence and then much more experience as we look at Spencer study club members.  [0:26:58]  When you help someone with their obstructive sleep apnea, the central sleep apnea gets  better too. Okay? So don't freak out about it. Don't think, oh my goodness, this person  stops stops breathing centrally five times an hour. That's I'm sure, never gonna go away.  That's gonna be a problem. Almost guaranteed, you’ll see that get better.  6/17/25   Page   of 8   15

SSC 2.0 - 112: Snoring & Sleep Apnea  Sleep Apnea Increases Risk of..   [0:27:16]  Sleep apnea, increased risks of dang near everything. And these are my friend John  Remmer's sleep physician. He and he's a pulmonologist researcher. He says all these  things are kind of co travelers. So it's not that sleep apnea necessarily makes it so you  have high blood pressure, but we see high blood pressure and sleep apnea together a lot.  We see heart failure and sleep apnea together a lot. We see insulin resistance and sleep  apnea together a lot. And that's a topic that we're gonna be talking about more because of  some recent stuff that is going on. And so stay tuned. That'll be in level two and then a little  bit more in level five. As we kind of go deep into sleep. There's some things. Actually  someone who relatively recently joined Spencer study club was able to get his sleep ap -  nea under control mostly by getting his insulin response under control using a continuous  glucose monitor, things like that.  [0:28:18]  Fascinating stuff. I've been learning a lot more about this topic very recently. And it's amaz -  ing as you go into that literature and into that area, a lot of these risks, a lot of these co  travelers are the same. Like literally I was listening to this Podcast about insulin resistance.  And the doctor was going through, and this might happen. The person might have this and  this and this. And I could have changed it to sleep apnea instead of insulin resistance, and  it would have been the same lecture I give. Okay, so we see these things hanging out a  lot, and we're still trying to figure out, well, how do we best help these people with this,  what's causing what, things like that. So don't think causal. Don't think you have sleep ap -  nea and then you have all this other stuff. And don't think necessarily the other way around  that you have this other stuff and then that makes you have sleep apnea. But we're seeing  these in the same people all the time.  Heart Disease in the US   [0:29:19]  Heart disease in the United States, kind of a big deal. About 610,000 people die a year or  purposes of helping you understand how kind of a big deal that is, we didn't have 610,000  people per year die of COVID Okay, there was more than 610,000 people died of COVID  but not per year. So we shut down our whole world during COVID for way less deaths than  occur with heart disease every year globally. How come? Well, because this was this  unique thing and people could be affected that were mostly doing the right things and stuff,  whereas heart disease is just one of those things. And people just kind of look at diseases  like this that kill tons of people as well to a degree. It's, yeah, that's a lifestyle decision and  that's a whatever it is. But I just point this out 'cause it's a lot of people and we don't, again  you're not gonna see on CNN daily counter of how many people have died of heart dis -  ease this year. That's not something they do, but it's a bigger impact on the world than  6/17/25   Page   of 9   15

SSC 2.0 - 112: Snoring & Sleep Apnea  pretty much any other disease. This is currently the number one killer in the world. In the  US again, 325,000 people will have sudden cardiac death per year.  [0:30:42]  And so these are people that just die. Maybe they knew they had heart disease before this  happened. Hundreds of thousands don't know. So that's just their first event is they drop  dead. I actually had a cousin in his early 40s that just dropped dead one day. He was ac -  tually driving to work and dies. That's called sudden cardiac death. Over 700,000 people  have heart attacks every year in the US It's just US Stats alone. Big numbers right. That's  a lot of people affected by this. Now, why we care when we're talking about sleep, dental  sleep medicine is unfortunately, a lot of cardiologists don't necessarily make this connec -  tion, believe it or not. And so that can be something that you can work on with your pa -  tients who are on heart medications and being treated for their hypertension. And all this  stuff is, believe it or not, you may think that their doctor would have talked to them about  sleep apnea, maybe got a sleep study, stuff like that. Probably not. Most of the time not.  And you can be the one to bring this up, hey, I wonder. And oftentimes when you treat  people for their sleep apnea, their hypertension gets better, they don't have to use as  much medication, things like that it's pretty cool.  Sleep Apnea in an Adult   [0:31:52]  [video playback]  Okay, now we're gonna watch a video of an adult having sleep apnea. Why don't you try to  hold your breath with him right now? Hold your breath. Trying to breathe in. Can't hold your  breath. Okay, go ahead and breathe again. Hold your breath again, though. Hear that air -  way collapse and hold your breath. Now when you stop holding your breath and he stops  holding his breath, I want you to watch right here. Okay. How many of you think that that is  the most exercise that this guy gets all day long? Okay. That wasn't very nice, was it? So  you saw the abdominal thrust that he was doing there at the end. You saw all that effort to  recover from stopping breathing. Does it kind of make sense now why? Maybe people like  my dad woke up having a heart attack. That's a lot of work, right? That did not look restful,  did it? Could you hold your breath as long as he could? Probably not, right? Or maybe not.  And he's doing that over and over and over again. After watching that video, does it make  more sense how that oxygen can desaturate?  [0:34:00]  Because it's not just that you hold your breath once, like I talked about with doing the test  with your own pulse oximeter, it's that you stop breathing over and over and over again  and you really don't get back up to normal levels in those little periods where you are  breathing, how was this gentleman sleeping posture wise? Was he on his back or his  side? He was on his side, wasn't he? Why wasn't he on his back? I told you before that in  the sleep lab, they tell people to sleep on their back 'cause they wanna see them at their  worst. Well, the reason he was on his side was 'cause there's no way this guy can sleep  6/17/25   Page   of 10   15

SSC 2.0 - 112: Snoring & Sleep Apnea  on his back, he would die on his back. So his brain at some point said, hey, fat guy, you  got to sleep on your side. Okay? Same thing for my dad. My dad who said, yeah, sleep  study doesn't count. I was on my back. I never sleep on my back. At some point his brain  said, hey, fat guy, you need to be a side sleeper. Now, the difference between my dad and  this guy that we just watched is my dad could sleep on his back.  [0:35:00]  Yes. He had 81 apneas, hypopneas per hour. So his index was, his AHI was 81 per hour.  But he was still able to kind of get through that experience on his back at home. He obvi -  ously slept on his side. Now, check out the list of symptoms here. The nighttime symptoms  and the daytime symptoms. This is all stuff that goes along with people with sleep apnea.  As I mentioned on the previous slide, you're gonna see a lot of these co-travelers in other  stuff, aren't you? Not just sleep apnea.  Depression or OSA?   [0:35:00]  Now, on that list of daytime symptoms, you may have seen depression. So what if a  woman like this went into her doctor and said, doc I'm not sleeping well, don't have energy  like I used to, just not feeling good. Is she likely to be sent for a sleep study or is she more  likely to be diagnosed with depression? If you said more likely to be diagnosed with de -  pression, you would absolutely be right. Is depression more commonly diagnosed in  women or men? Women? By a little or a lot? A lot more women. What about chronic fa -  tigue syndrome? You would think with a name like chronic fatigue syndrome, that you  would do a sleep study or something as part of that diagnosis, right?  [0:36:20]  Because the person's chronically tired should probably look at their sleep? No that's just  completely diagnosed based on subjective information from the patient. Is chronic fatigue  syndrome more commonly diagnosed in women or men? Women? By a little or a lot? A lot  more women. What about fibromyalgia? So I mentioned earlier that if you don't get deep  sleep, you hurt all over the place 'cause your body can't heal itself. Is fibromyalgia more  commonly diagnosed in women or men by a little or a lot? What about TMJ problems? Are  you seeing the theme here? Is it possible that a lot of people with these problems actually  have underlying sleep apnea that's being ignored? You bet it is. Now let me make a strong  point right now. Am I saying that all depression is misdiagnosed or undiagnosed sleep ap -  nea and that if their sleep apnea were treated, that depression will go away? No, I'm not  saying that. Wouldn't it be awesome if it was, though? Wouldn't that be great? Wouldn't it  be amazing if all we had to do was blow air up somebody's face or bring their jaw forward  a little bit with an oral appliance and we could cure depression?  [0:37:45]  That would be fabulous. So, no, I'm not saying that. But what I am saying is, before my  wife goes on Prozac, she's getting a sleep study. Does that seem reasonable to you?  6/17/25   Page   of 11   15

SSC 2.0 - 112: Snoring & Sleep Apnea  Yeah. So we'll talk more about the connection with TMJ problems in this set, but I just want  you to really think about that. And there's definitely people in your life and definitely pa -  tients that you have that are on these medications, and the medications don't even help  them that much. They'll say, yeah it doesn't really help that much. I'm on my third antide -  pressant now, or whatever. Ask those people, do you snore? It'll start blowing your mind if  you haven't been doing this already. When you ask thinner women, do you snore when  they've got symptoms? When you see stuff in there in their history and in their chart, how  often they're gonna be like, well, yeah, why would you ask me that? And then you tell them  why? And then you say what do you think your brain cares more about a good night's  sleep, a restful sleep, restorative sleep, or air? Probably air, right? Is it possible that some  of your depression feelings could be related to not getting a good night's sleep?  [0:39:05]  And they will typically tell you, yeah, I sleep really bad. I wake up feeling bad. I wake up  feeling tired. Okay, so keep that in mind. Please be somebody that's out there advocating  for these people, getting them the help that they need. 'Cause if it really is sleep apnea,  the beauty. And let me make this point now here, too. If I was to refer this woman for a  consultation with the sleep doctor to have a chat or to her primary care doctor to have a  chat to see if a sleep study is indicated. I would say. And by the way, if the doctor does de -  cide to get a sleep study with you, man, do I hope you have sleep apnea. I really hope you  have sleep apnea. And they'll kind of look at you like, that's kind of mean. That's kind of  rude. You're like, because if you do have sleep apnea, it's actually easy to treat. And if we  treat your sleep apnea, it's like you don't have sleep apnea, okay? That's the point of all  that.  Sleep Apnea in Children   [0:40:10]  Now we're gonna watch a video of a child having sleep apnea. [video playback]  That one's no fun to watch, is it? That one's pretty awful. You notice that once or twice  there completely stopped trying, struggling to breathe, no noise at all. Most of the time it  was just this partial breaths. Pretty awful. So with that burnt in memory of that awful video,  I want you to burn into your memory the bolded words on this slide. Snoring and bruxism.  For the rest of your career, if you have a child in your practice who has evidence of brux -  ism. So tooth wear and mom or dad says that kid snores, that kid has sleep apnea until  proven otherwise. In my experience, that kid will for sure have sleep apnea. I'm sure there  are some outliers out there somewhere that have snoring and bruxism who won't. But I  haven't seen too many of those yet. And I'll give you pearls in level two of how to do this.  I'll say it right now just so that you don't have to go search for this, but you wanna refer the  kiddo to a pediatric sleep doctor, not to their pediatrician, not to an ear, nose and throat  doctor, but you wanna send them to a pediatric sleep doctor, that might mean that they  6/17/25   Page   of 12   15

SSC 2.0 - 112: Snoring & Sleep Apnea  gotta get in a car and drive to some university center or something like that 'cause a pedi -  atric sleep doctor won't be in every town.  [0:42:17]  Once again, if a kid has evidence of bruxism and snoring, they've got sleep apnea until  proven otherwise. And you should for sure get them in to get tested. Let the pediatric sleep  doctor handle it. If the pediatric sleep doctor shows that the kid does have sleep apnea  through a sleep test, and that will be an in lab sleep test, then they the doctor will refer  them for tonsilloadenoidectomy. And that is the treatment for sleep apnea in children. The  first line treatment is tonsilloadenoidectomy. But some of the things you're looking for is  tiredness in a child is abnormal. High arch palates, narrow arches, retrognathia. Those  would be give you anatomical indications that there could be a problem.  Girls with Adenoids   [0:43:00]  Here's some of my kin folks. So now you know why I look the way I do. I'm kidding. These  are not my relatives. But this from a medical textbook, 1913. And the caption is girls with  adenoids. Girls with adenoids. And note the long faces, note the dark circles under their  eyes. And mostly you noted immediately the open mouth habitus. So all of these young  ladies have their mouth open. Why do they have their mouth open? 'Cause they can't  breathe through their nose.  [0:43:27]  Why can't they breathe through their nose? 'Cause the adenoidal tissue is right behind  your nose. So the back of your throat, the nose. And you can't breathe through your nose if  you have enlarged adenoids. So these young ladies are growing and developing without  the ability to have their tongue up in their palate, which means their palate doesn't expand,  doesn't form the way it's supposed to. Their maxilla will not form the way it's supposed to.  Because what do you think the brain cares more about? Air or proper facial growth and  development? Probably air. Right? Okay, so keep this in mind. Now, usually the first line of  treatment for sleep apnea in children is tonsilloadenoidectomy. And here's a couple differ -  ent studies. Again, this is not some new information. Check it out. 1987, that enlargement  of the tonsils. Most common cause, obstructive sleep apnea. We've known this for  decades. Tonsil removal may improve school performance. 1988, rapid maxillary ex -  panders and effective appliance for treating children with OSAS syndrome. That's obstruc -  tive sleep apnea syndrome. So this is not new news that this is the usual cause. And it's  the first line of treatment in these kiddos.  ADHD   [0:44:49)]  6/17/25   Page   of 13   15

SSC 2.0 - 112: Snoring & Sleep Apnea  The ADHD, which seems to be a ton more nowadays and in the past 20 years than it was  before. But that has also been linked to obstructive sleep apnea. In this 2012 study, snor -  ing was associated with higher levels of inattention and hyperactivity. This is an interesting  stat from that study. 81% of snoring children with ADHD. Now, that was only 25% of them  could have their ADHD eliminated if their snoring were effectively treated. Last one there.  1997 again. Children with ADHD are two and a half times more likely to be bed wetters. All  of this is not new. Here's just like a little news article back from 2007 in Parade magazine.  I'd be surprised if that even exists anymore. If your child has ADHD and trouble breathing,  tonsils may be to blame.  Enuresis   [0:45:42]  Bed wetting connected to sleep apnea in children. Surgical remover of upper airway ob -  struction. So, in other words, tonsilloadenoidectomy led to a complete cure or in nocturnal  decrease or complete cure in nocturnal enuresis in 76% of the children studied. That was  in 91 in 90 in the angle orthodontist. Interestingly, nocturnal enuresis ceased within a few  months in 10 cases. All 10 cases using rapid maxillary expansion. So this again, nothing  new. However, is your local orthodontist likely aware of this stuff? Is your local pediatric  dentist likely taught this in dental school? It would be extremely unlikely that they would be  aware of this. And how you present this is important 'cause nowadays, again, as I'm  recording this now, the environment is a little bit, there's like airway friendly orthodontists  or airway friendly orthodontics. And that's now at odds with other orthodontists. I hate that  term by the way. You may have used that term yourself and no offense to using that term,  but I would not use that term if I were you because if I say airway friendly orthodontics,  then what am I saying about all the other orthodontics? It's an anti airway. I don't think  there's any orthodontist in the world that's like, boy, how can I make this person's airway  smaller? How can I really screw up this kid's sleep for the rest of their life? Twirling their  mustache as they say that that's not happening. Right? So it's more important to go to your  pediatric dentist, to your orthodontist and say, hey I'm learning about this. I'm seeing this.  I've reviewed this literature that's been around for decades and decades. And what are  your thoughts on this when you have these kiddos in your practice and they get diag -  nosed?  [0:47:30]  This is why I send a pediatric sleep doctors first, 'cause a pediatric sleep doctor is gonna  get a sleep study. They're not gonna take a cone beam or something or look at their arch  width. They're gonna get a sleep study. And that sleep study is going to determine if the kid  has sleep apnea or not. Remember what the AHI needs to be in order for it to be abnormal  in a child. Do you remember one AHI of one or greater is abnormal in a child? Okay? So  sort of it doesn't take that many for it to be abnormal in a child. And then they're gonna get  6/17/25   Page   of 14   15

SSC 2.0 - 112: Snoring & Sleep Apnea  their tonsils and anoids out and then according to the evidence, a lot of them that's gonna  take care of it.  Myofunctional Therapy   [0:48:06]  What about myofunctional therapy? Myofunctional therapy is amazing. And this study,  meta analysis done by Dr. Camacho, who you'll see his name on tons of meta analysis.  He's a sleep physician in the army, I believe he's still in the army anyway. And kind of in -  teresting background on this study is the people that were looking at it weren't huge pro -  ponents, advocates of myofunctional therapy. So they thought, well, let's put together this  meta analysis, check it all out and potentially debunk that this is even a thing. And actually  what they ended up doing was showing that, yeah, this is actually pretty strong evidence  on this. So from the conclusion, current literature demonstrates that myofunctional therapy  decreases apnea apopne index by approximately 50% in adults, 62% in children. We're  talking. That's it. Nothing else? Only myofunctional therapy. So why would you not do my -  ofunctional therapy with your patients? Now, I'll talk later about how to do this. I'm not a  huge advocate of you having your hygienist become a myofunctional therapist or some -  thing like that. That's unnecessary. There's free resources online and if somebody does  need actual one on one help, then there's resources for that. But the online resources are  fantastic. And to give these to your patients, adults and children, makes a ton of sense.  [outro music]  6/17/25   Page   of 15   15

