SSC 2.0 - 113: Diagnosis of Sleep Apnea  SSC 2.0   Level 1  113: Diagnosis of Sleep Apnea  [intro music]  Jefferson’s Story   [0:00:12]  All right, now let me tell you a story here about my child, Jefferson. So here is Jefferson  when he had just started first grade. And he is obviously all wired up to have a sleep study.  So a few days before this picture was taken, my wife Jenny and I, we were called into a  parent-teacher conference with the principal. And this was at the start of the school year.  Okay. So a few weeks in to first grade, and we're called in to talk to the principal and the  first grade teacher. Now, Jefferson is child five of my six children. So at this point in my  parenting career, I know that you're not getting called into school in the first couple weeks  of school because they're going to give your child a humanitarian award. Okay. I knew  there was something up. And because Jefferson is also child five of six, I was able to com -  pare him to his siblings and where they were at his age. And Jefferson was not reading at  the same level as his siblings were at that age. Just a delightful little boy, just such a hap -  py-go-lucky kind of boy. But he struggled with kind of some of the academic type of stuff.  And like I said, with reading, but then just in general. You go to church and they teach kids  songs by rote memory, unless kids can read.  [0:01:53]  But kids that are two, three, four years old would have these songs memorized, and Jef -  ferson couldn't remember them. So when he would sing these songs, he would get a few  of the words that he would be able to remember, but not all of them. And kids much  younger than him were able to remember those words by rote memory. So anyway, so we  go into the school and they tell us, yeah Mr. And Mrs. Spencer, sorry, but Jeff's just not at  the same level as the other first graders here, and so we're going to put him into basically  kindergarten 2.0, and we'll give him special tutors and special attention so that we can  bring him up to speed. But bottom line he's going to kindergarten. He's being held back.  They don't use those terms anymore, held back and stuff like that.  [0:02:44]  But that's what was going on. And kind of my first thought was, well, maybe if you guys  didn't suck as teachers so bad, my kid would be doing better. That's my first thought. And  then my second thought was, well, maybe if my wife and I didn't suck as parents so bad,  maybe he'd be doing better. You know, maybe we're off our game a little bit. Maybe we've  lost a little bit of that zeal with child five of six. Maybe we haven't been reading to him as  much as we should have. Maybe we aren't putting in the effort as much, and that's the  09/01/25   Page   of 1   16

SSC 2.0 - 113: Diagnosis of Sleep Apnea  problem. And then my third thought was, I wonder if Jeff has sleep apnea. Okay. Have I  told you yet what I do for a living and that this is all I've ever done for a living? Maybe I  haven't. So let me go back in time here a little bit very quickly and tell you that I went right  out of dental school into a limited practice of TMD in '98, took over a practice in '98, right  out of dental school. And then within two years, I was treating sleep.  [0:03:49]  And it took a while for that sleep practice to grow. But still, by the time this is happening  right here, I'm treating sleep apnea patients every day, every day in my practice. And I  missed it in my own kid. So as we left that school, and oh, by the way, this is a little cherry  on top, the teacher, the 21-year-old first grade teacher, as we were leaving, said, oh, by  the way, you might want to get Jefferson tested for ADHD. Okay, what's the blood test for  that? What's the x-ray for that? Oh, there isn't one? Okay, right on. So if my kid would have  been diagnosed with ADHD and put on speed, right? Because that's the drug that you give  kids for ADHD is speed. Interesting. Why is that? Well, tired children act hyper. And Jeff  complained of being tired a lot. And his kindergarten teacher would ask, is Jeff struggling  to sleep at home or anything like that? He reports being tired all the time. And I didn't pick  up on that. When the kindergarten teacher said that the year before, I didn't really pick up  on that. I was kind of like, oh, yeah, Jeff's a funny little kid.  [0:05:03]  I don't know why he's telling you he's tired. He seems fine. I didn't pick up on it. So that's  weird. So the tired children, though, will act up. They'll act hyper. Any of you that have chil -  dren know this or have around grandchildren or whatever. If you keep up a little kid way  past their bedtime, they get worse and worse and worse and more and more hyper. They  don't get more sedate. So you give these kids speed, and it tricks their brain into thinking  that they are not tired. Now, real quick, am I saying that all ADHD is actually undiagnosed  or misdiagnosed sleep apnea? No. Wouldn't it be amazing if it was? Wouldn't it be awe -  some if we could get all kids everywhere off of their speed, off of their Ritalin and Adderall  by taking their tonsil and adenoids out? Yeah, that'd be pretty amazing as far as I'm con -  cerned. So, in my family, before a kid starts taking speed, they're getting a sleep study,  which is exactly what happened here. So, as we are walking out of the school, I ring up my  sleep doc friend and say, hey Mark, I need to get Jeff in for a sleep study as soon as pos -  sible.  [0:06:11]  So, this is a night or two after that experience at the school, and it turned out Jeff had  sleep apnea. And his AHI was about 4.5, which is pretty bad for a kiddo. So, we make an  appointment and we get his tonsils and adenoids out. And Jeff became a different child  overnight. Now, Jeff did not have evidence of bruxism. Jeff did not snore. Okay, those are  those two bolded words that I told you to imprint in your brain, right? He didn't have either  of those. So, his stuff was the academic stuff, and then also he was a restless sleeper. He  would wake up almost every night at 2:30 in the morning and come in and come into our  bedroom and we'd have to take him back to bed. And even if we weren't there, if he was  staying with his grandparents or someone was house sitting for us or something, he would  09/01/25   Page   of 2   16

SSC 2.0 - 113: Diagnosis of Sleep Apnea  wake up, go in, have to be brought back to bed. That stopped. That stopped that night.  That stopped. He started doing better in school. Everything got better, just overnight. Okay,  so back to that slide with the snoring and the bruxism. They don't have to have snoring  and bruxism. I'm just telling you, if they do have snoring and bruxism, they got it for sure.  But don't misinterpret that as they need snoring and bruxism in order to have sleep apnea.  I'm not saying that. So, my kid didn't have snoring and bruxism, had pretty bad, like severe  sleep apnea for a kiddo.  [0:07:39]  All right, so then let's now fast forward a little bit here in time. And here he is at the end of  sixth grade. At this point, we lived out in North Carolina. And one night, we are at home  and watching a movie. And Jeff is... Oh, and I should mention, too, that Jeff's younger  brother, Jared, shortly after Jeff had his sleep study, we were camping and Jared was  sleeping near me in the camper. And he was snoring. And I was like, oh my gosh, fool me  once, shame on me. So Jared got a sleep study, too. And Jared did not have sleep apnea.  Okay, didn't even come up to the AHI of one level. So he did not have sleep apnea. He  has his tonsils and adenoids. Jeff is my only child that has had his tonsils and adenoids  removed. So now we're sixth grade. He's doing fine. Again, he's a year behind, but he's  doing well. You know, not perfect. You know, one of my catchphrases is, how many nights  without proper oxygenation of the developing brain are too many for your child? One,  right? Well, my kid had that problem there for a while. So he's making up for that.  [0:08:55]  Making up for that early development, mental development and scholastic development,  brain development. But again, doing okay. And one day we're watching a movie and he's  kind of near me on the couch and he's making this noise. So his lips were together and he  would do this. And I look at him like, Jeff, what are you doing? He's like, what do you  mean? Like, you're making a weird noise when you breathe there. Stop it. And he's like,  okay. I wasn't aware I was doing anything weird. Like, can you just put your lips together  and just breathe quiet through your nose? Are you able to do that? And he does. He's like,  okay, do that. And five minutes later, making that noise again. So what had happened  there?  [0:09:54]  Okay, think your anatomy here. What's that going on? Did you say adenoids? You're right.  So the palatine tonsils that you take out, those are encapsulated. So those don't come  back. So the tonsils you see in the back of the throat there, those are gone. But the ade -  noids at the back of the nose, back of the throat, those are scraped off. So the analogy I  use there, that's like going out to your garden and pulling the tops of the weeds off. Well,  they can grow back. And maybe even they're going to grow back. So the adenoids can  grow back. Jeff's grew back. So we get another sleep study while we're in North Carolina  by a sleep doctor friend of mine there who's fabulous. Guess what? Jeff's AHI, 4.5. And  then we moved. So didn't have time to get him into the ear, nose, and throat doctor there  in North Carolina because we were actively moving. This was the end of the school year.  We were kind of waiting for school to be out, and then we were moving back west. So we  09/01/25   Page   of 3   16

SSC 2.0 - 113: Diagnosis of Sleep Apnea  move, and this is when we moved to Utah where we live now. And I take Jeff into an ear,  nose, and throat doctor, and I take his paperwork and his sleep study and stuff, and I didn't  do a lot of research.  [0:11:17]  I didn't reach out to sleep doctor people that I knew and be like, hey, what ENT should I  take him to or whatever. I just picked an ENT. And I go in, and we're waiting for the doctor  to come into the room, and I see on the wall there's a thing that says, Member, American  Academy of Sleep Medicine. And I'm thinking, oh, sweet. So not every ENT would be a  member of the Academy of Sleep Medicine. So I'm thinking, okay, this is cool. This guy  knows about sleep. And then I see over here a brochure for Inspire. Okay, and that's the  surgery that has a lead to the tongue and to the ribs. And every time the person breathes  in, every time they inspire, it shocks the tongue to open the airway. We'll talk more about  that later. But this guy's doing it. So I'm like, okay, cool, man. This guy knows about sleep.  He's doing Inspire. Awesome. I'm in the right place. So I give him Jeff's sleep study. And  he takes it and he, like, flips through it to the end. And he looks at the conclusion. He's like,  oh, well, so, yeah, an AHI below five, like your son Jeff has.  [0:12:24]  So his is 4.5. So anything below five, we consider that normal. And I said, well, in adults  we do. And he said, right, in adults we do. And I was like, oh, crap, I know more than this  guy. So then I kind of revealed that I maybe knew a little bit more than the average guy on  this topic. And then I talked to him about what had happened before. And that based on  my observations, I was thinking maybe Jeff's adenoids had grown back. And then the ENT  is kind of like, yeah we should probably get him tested for allergies and things like that.  And I'm like, okay, but I don't think it's allergies. I don't think that's our problem. I think the  adenoids have grown back. And to his credit, maybe he was thinking the adenoids had  grown back, but he was thinking allergies were the reason they were inflamed or whatever.  And maybe we need to take care of the etiology of that. And so I'll give him the benefit of  the doubt on that. But again, six kids, no allergies. I was pretty sure it wasn't allergies.  [0:13:31]  And plus, we just moved from North Carolina where there's a lot more flora, fauna than in  Utah. And I'm sitting there in the office with him and he's got a nasal endoscope, a video  nasal endoscope, literally sitting right next to him. And I had to talk him in to scoping my  kid. He wasn't going to. And I'm like, couldn't we look? Isn't that a thing? Isn't that what  that's for? And so I talked him into it. He looks. Jeff didn't love that, by the way. No one en -  joys having a camera stuck in their nose. And he's like, oh, yeah, sure enough, there they  are. Those adenoids have grown back. They still put him through the allergy testing, which  is no fun. Spoiler alert, no allergies. And then he got his adenoids removed again. And he  became a different child again overnight. Jeff was a little pudgy, a little heavy at the time.  And all of the rest of my sons are very thin. And he was self-conscious about that whenev -  er we'd go swimming and stuff, which we do a ton in the summer.  [0:14:38]  09/01/25   Page   of 4   16

SSC 2.0 - 113: Diagnosis of Sleep Apnea  And we go to lakes and go wakeboarding and wake surfing and stuff like that. And he'd  always wear a swim shirt because he was self-conscious. And after he gets his tonsils out,  in the next year, year and a half, he grew like six inches and trimmed down. And every -  thing changed. And this is a sort of recent picture of him. So this is a few years old at the  point that I'm recording this. And I talked to Jeff recently. He's actually serving a mission for  our church right now as I record this. And he's noticing that again with the adenoids. So  those adenoids have come back again. And so he's using Afrin on a regular/daily, nightly  basis so that he can breathe well through his nose. But he's totally made up for all of the  deficiencies that he had. One of his favorite things now is to memorize things. Like he'll  memorize scriptures. He'll memorize passages, big long things that he'll memorize. And he  really enjoys doing that.  [0:15:41]  So he's made up for it. But here's the moral of this huge personal story that I just gave you  there is don't miss it in your own kid. Don't miss it in your grandkid. And try not to miss it in  your patients. I hate to even think about the trajectory of Jeff's life if I miss this. And that  motivates me to be with you right now. Because there's some kid that you're around, be  that a patient of yours, a family member, whatever, that you could massively change the  trajectory of their life. Imagine personally growing up and people thinking that you're dumb  because you don't do as well in school or you can't remember things that other kids do or  people making fun of you because you're chubby or whatever. How does that affect you?  How does that affect your self-esteem, your self-worth? How does that make you decide  what you go into when you get to the point where you're making decisions on what you  want to do when you grow up? I think about that a lot. And those are part of the ripple ef -  fects that I talk about all the time.  [0:17:00]  And I want this to really sink in right here. I don't see a lot of kids in my practice, but I  spend a lot of time doing this. I spend a lot of time talking to people about their own kids  and talking to dentists about their own families. That's my way to help these kiddos even if  we don't see a lot of kids in my practice. If you're a restorative dentist, if you're a general  dentist, you are. So watch for this in your practice, and you will massively change the tra -  jectory of these kids' lives. Not only will you change it right there and improve their quality  of life, but you will change the entire trajectory of where life takes them.  Diagnosis of Sleep Apnea   [0:17:39]  Let's talk now about diagnosis of sleep apnea. So back in the olden times, what would  happen is a patient would go into a sleep lab and be seen by this lovely respiratory sleep  technician that would go over and put all of the wires on and the straps around the chest  and the stomach and wires down on the legs and on the head and on the mentalis usually,  sometimes the masseters depending on the lab. But they'd wire the guy they have over by  09/01/25   Page   of 5   16

SSC 2.0 - 113: Diagnosis of Sleep Apnea  the eye muscles for REM sleep. They would put all of this stuff on in a polysomnogram, I  mean a PSG. And then the patient would be told, all right, go ahead and go to sleep. They  would typically be strongly encouraged to sleep on their back as much as possible. This  was for two reasons. One, to not have the stuff fall off during the night.  [0:18:37]  And also, by the way, they would typically put these leads bilateral usually so that in case  one lead came off, then it's like I'm talking the leg leads and things like that. They would  have more data points come in and they would have a redundancy. And then, of course,  they had all the ones all over the head for brainwaves and whatnot. So they had them  sleep on their backs so that they would be less likelihood of stuff falling off. But then they  also had them sleep on their back so that they would see them at their worst in that supine  REM sleep. That's what they're hoping for on a PSG was that you would get into REM  sleep on your back and then we would see how bad your sleep apnea is there. And then,  of course, the technician spends all night looking at these squiggly lines in the other room  and watching the patient. And usually they would have two, sometimes even three patients  that they would be monitoring throughout that night. Now, all of this still happens. So I've  got some kind of old pictures here for history's sake here. But this does still exist.  [0:19:39]  And a PSG are done all over the place. There's lots of labs, although many labs have  closed. So when I was earlier in my career, there were a lot more labs, probably maybe 15  years ago or so. So in the early 2000 teens, super common and in the 2000s for sure, su -  per common for people to get PSGs, very uncommon for them to get home sleep testing.  Home sleep testing came on the scene because, frankly, a PSG was expensive. You had  to have a human there watching them. It was a lot of material. They had to go through and  score these things. There were a lot of money. So $15,000 to $2,000 for a PSG. And  again, the insurance companies and Medicare didn't love spending all this money. And  also, if you think about many of the things we've talked about so far is sleep apnea has re -  ally been focused on fat old men for quite some time. So you would do this rather sophisti -  cated, very sensitive test, and everyone was positive for the test, right? Because only the  people that were extremely likely to have the disease went in for the test in the first place.  [0:21:07]  And so after a while, the home sleep testing companies, the people that made these ma -  chines, they were able to correlate these with PSGs at a fairly high level. And then ulti -  mately Medicare asked the sleep medicine community, if you will, prove to us that a home  sleep test isn't good enough for diagnosing obstructive sleep apnea. I mean, that's all  you're doing. If you need something like a multiple sleep latency test during the day for  narcolepsy or something like that, it's a different story. But for basic, if you will, obstructive  sleep apnea, it's really not that complicated. And the sleep medicine community was not  able to respond to that. They tried saying we need this more detailed information, but at  the end of the day, it was not compelling. And so then Medicare started covering home  sleep testing instead of PSG, and you had to have a reason to get a PSG. Super fast after  that, the insurance companies followed suit. Nowadays, in most states, it is the only way  09/01/25   Page   of 6   16

SSC 2.0 - 113: Diagnosis of Sleep Apnea  you're going to get a PSG is if you have failed an HST, and then you're still symptomatic,  and then they need that PSG, and there's medical necessity to get that PSG.  [0:22:30]  Another reason for medical necessity to PSG that you may need to actually point out to a  sleep doctor, believe it or not, is titration of an oral appliance. Titration of CPAP is now  done a lot with auto-set CPAPs, things like that. It used to all be done live in the sleep lab.  Same type of setup here, except this person would be on CPAP, and then the technician in  the other room, I do that because they would actually tap the space bar on the keyboard in  order to increase the pressure on the CPAP, and they would set the pressure accordingly  to what pressure it took to get rid of those apneas, hypopneas, the snoring, and depending  on their sleep posture. So if they rolled over on their back, then they might have to turn the  pressure up a little bit more, things like that. That's rarely done anymore. It's now done  with auto set CPAP machines. Oral appliances don't lend themselves to auto set, right? So  we don't have that ability for the appliance to just figure out the best spot for the jaw. So  that's a nice medically necessary reason for them to do a PSG.  [0:23:34]  You might want to talk to the sleep doctors you work with about that because usually  they're not aware that that would be covered by the patient's insurance. Now speaking of  home sleep, or here's Jefferson, I mentioned him earlier on the sleep study and there he is  as a cute little kid with all those wires and stuff. And you would think that that would be  very difficult for anyone to go to sleep with all that stuff on you. No big deal at all. He fell  asleep literally within minutes, like two or three minutes. And then here in the middle of the  screen is that technician watching all the squiggly lines all night long.  Home Sleep Tests   [0:24:12]  Okay, now speaking of home sleep tests, there's lots of different home sleep tests on the  market, a ton of them nowadays. And the main thing to remember with home sleep tests  and to perhaps you might be the one that needs to educate your medical colleagues on  this, not your sleep doctor colleagues, but your primary care doctors maybe internal medi -  cine doctors, people like that, is that you cannot rule out sleep apnea with a home sleep  test only in. So a home sleep test will tell you that you do have sleep apnea, but it's not  good at telling you you don't have sleep apnea. This is critically important because a lot of  the patients that you see as a dentist are going to skew younger and healthier. And as you  send them for testing, again, olden days, wasn't that big a deal because they would be all  wired up. We'd be able to see their brain waves. We'd be able to get really good data on  these little kind of sleep disturbances and going from lighter to or deeper to lighter sleep  and stuff like that. We'd get a lot of data. And so the doctor would be able to say, hey,  yeah, you might not meet the criteria for having X number of apneas or hypopneas per  hour, but we do see a lot of sleep related disturbances, things like that, arousals and  09/01/25   Page   of 7   16

SSC 2.0 - 113: Diagnosis of Sleep Apnea  whatnot. And this would be termed upper airway resistance syndrome, for example, if they  had a lot of disturbances, but didn't have a lot of AHI. So their RDI, their respiratory distur -  bance index might be high, but their AHI was low. Insurance tends to go on AHI.  [0:25:56]  So be aware of this because as you send people out and they are tested, they are almost  assuredly nowadays going to be tested with a home sleep test. And very commonly, it'll  come back that they don't have sleep apnea, except it won't say that. So if you actually get  the report, it will say this test is inconclusive for diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. And  then it will typically also say if the patient is symptomatic, then further testing may be indi -  cated, or even it may say a PSG may be indicated. Be aware of this as well, because  when you start talking to your patients more about sleep apnea, you will have patients that  go, oh, I was already tested. And you say, well, tell me about that. Yeah, they sent this  thing home with me, and there was like a strap on my chest and this box, this thing under  my nose, and I think there was something on my finger, if I remember correctly. And or  they may say, yeah, there was like this wristwatch thing, and there was a thing on my fin -  ger. And, or they may say, yeah, it was this little tiny thing that was on my finger. That'd be  like a night owl unit. So nowadays, again, multiple different units that medical doctors will  use. You're going to want to find out what your local doctors are using. But they will de -  scribe to you a home sleep test. And then you say, okay, and what were the results? Yeah,  they said I didn't have it. Now, remember that lots of time, people are diagnosed more for  insurance than they are for disease.  [0:27:29]  So if it doesn't meet insurance criteria, that means you don't have it. But with the analogy  that I used early on in this series on sleep here about the dog, remember? So if your dog  was waking you up twice an hour, you'd be furious, right? Well, an AHI of two, who says  that that is not going to impact certain people? Now, everybody would it impact? No, it  wouldn't. But if your patient, if they're symptomatic, if they're tired, if they're struggling with  these different problems, then I think it'd be worthwhile to look into it. And that person  might get a PSG that's more sensitive and more specific, and they're going to have differ -  ent results on that. The bottom line, remember, you can rule it in, but you can't rule it out.  Now, when you are using, if you choose to use home sleep testing, I don't in our practices,  but we did. So back when we were beginners, we would do home sleep tests and make  sure that the patient was doing well and titrate them with the HSTS or pulse oximetry and  all that kind of stuff.  [0:28:40]  I'll talk more about that in level two, but bottom line right now, if you're kind of watching  these levels in order, you don't need to buy any of that stuff because your medical col -  leagues have it. And if they want to do the follow-up testing, they can. Remember me talk -  ing about apneas, hypopneas with my hand is the airway here. So you've got open airway,  snoring, hypopneas, apneas. If the snoring is better, the patient's better. And you might get  a little bit more data than just the snoring. But if you know that that snoring is significantly  better, if not completely gone, you're going to be doing really, really well. And that costs  09/01/25   Page   of 8   16

SSC 2.0 - 113: Diagnosis of Sleep Apnea  you a ton less money and you don't have to hassle with having all of this equipment and  stuff. If the referring doctor wants to do follow-up, which I strongly encourage them to do,  then I would talk to them about doing it because they'll get paid for it by insurance and  stuff.  OSA Prevalence   [0:29:40]  Okay. Now let's shift gears here a little bit and talk about prevalence of OSA. So I use this  slide, just get a little bit of a chuckle out of you. But really it's to impress upon you this idea  that our medical colleagues, like these guys here, they would get a sleep study. No prob -  lem. They go into the doctor, they say whatever. They say my ankle hurts, they're probably  getting a sleep study. Whereas the avatar that I've been using of the younger fit woman,  less likely. So let's look at some of this epidemiological data. And again, these studies  have been around a long time. So this study looked at a group of patients, a huge group of  patients that had been seen in the New England area for sleep apnea. And they're like,  hey, let's see what about prevalence of OSA in non-obese patients. So they took people  that were non-obese out of this group. So 54% of non-obese patients, this was a huge  number of people, were OSA positive. So over 50% of non-obese patients were positive  for obstructive sleep apnea. Now we got to take this study a little bit with a grain of salt be -  cause these are people that went in to get a sleep study. So clearly they were symp -  tomatic. Nevertheless, non-obese people, symptomatic, likely to have sleep apnea. This is  one of my favorite epidemiological studies done back in 2012. And guess where this  woman is from?  [0:31:23]  Did you say Sweden? Probably not. Maybe you did, if you did, gold star. So this is a  woman in Sweden. And this study, they took 400 women from a population random sample  of 10,000 women. So they have this group that they do research with, 10,000 women.  They took 400 randomly from that group of 10,000 women. And they gave them a ques -  tionnaire that they filled out. And then they did a home polysomnography. So multiple  leads, but it was done in the home. It wasn't done in the hospital. And before we go over  the results there, let's kind of put some of this in perspective. Now this slide, I love this  slide, but I got to tell you, it is a little old. So I wish that our obesity rate in the United States  was only 31%. It is much higher than that now, unfortunately. But you get the idea. So here  we are, here at the top of the list. We're not always top of the list, by the way. There are  some islanders that are more obese than us. Mexico gives us a run for our money every  once in a while.  [0:32:34]  But we're usually in the top 10 or so there with obesity rates. And then Sweden, on the  other hand, they tend to be towards the bottom of the list on obesity. So at this time, when  this fun little graphic was made, 31% in the United States, Sweden 10%, probably both of  09/01/25   Page   of 9   16

SSC 2.0 - 113: Diagnosis of Sleep Apnea  those countries have gone up. But now the US is about over 40% obese. Sweden has  probably gone up a little bit. Nevertheless, when this study was done, this was all accu -  rate. Okay, so here's what I'm painting the picture for you here. Sweden has way less obe -  sity than the United States. And we're talking to women and not symptomatic women nec -  essarily, just random 400 women. So what percent of these thinner women do you think  are going to have sleep apnea?  [0:33:32]  Well, probably I wouldn't be showing you this stuff if it was low, right? So here's what they  found. Obstructive sleep apnea was found in 50% of females aged 20 to 70 years old. Is  that crazy or what? 50% of these Swedish women had obstructive sleep apnea. Okay, so  we need to get, this is taking forever, but we need to get out of this idea that sleep apnea  is only in fat old men. This study in Laryngoscope looked at Far-East Asian men. Far East  Asian men were found to be non-obese and have severe obstructive sleep apnea. So if  you work in an area with a lot of Asian people, they're going to have way more likelihood of  having obstructive sleep apnea. But unless they're going to a physician that knows that,  they'll never get tested because Asian men and women in general tend to be far trimmer.  Okay, and it gets missed. So this is another thing for you to make your local medical com -  munity aware of.  Non-Surgical Treatment of OSA - CPAP   [0:34:52]  All right, now let's move into non-surgical treatment of OSA. This would be one non-surgi -  cal treatment. Here's the main non-surgical treatment, and that is, of course, CPAP, con -  tinuous positive airway pressure. Now CPAP has been considered the gold standard in the  treatment of OSA for years and years and years. I'll have some information in level five in  the deep into sleep level there of some new stuff that's happening. And a doctor who, if  you've been a member of Spencer Study Club for a while, you probably know Bill Noah,  and he spoke at our events, and he's doing something called KPAP. I've actually personal -  ly breathed on the KPAP versus CPAP, and it's a totally different experience. Nevertheless,  just talking about positive airway pressure therapy, the way it basically works is it blows the  airway open in all directions, but a little bit more lateral because there's more resistance to  forward. That's important to us when we talk about combination therapy, because if we can  keep that chin from falling backwards, then we can make it easier for that CPAP to work.  There are lots of different types and styles of CPAP machines. They are so small now.  They have humidifiers on them. There's a bajillion different masks. So one of the things I  like to point out is if you have a patient that you're talking about sleep apnea, whatnot, and  they say, oh yeah, I was diagnosed with sleep apnea 15 years ago. Well, tell me about it.  [0:36:10]  And I tried CPAP. I just couldn't stand it. And it might be worth another try. Okay. So if you  think, particularly if they are very unhealthy, they're on a bunch of different medications,  09/01/25   Page   of 10   16

SSC 2.0 - 113: Diagnosis of Sleep Apnea  they are obese, stuff like that. If I were you, I would get them back for another sleep test  for sure, so you know what you're dealing with. And then I would work with the sleep  community there to see if we can't give another whack at trying the CPAP. Because it's  possible that with the updates to the machines and the masks and the hoses and all the  stuff, that the person might now be able to tolerate it. So worthwhile. That's also going to  endear you to the community. And you're talking to pulmonologists, sleep doctors, they re -  ally, really, really, really, really like CPAP. So make sure that you are not disrespecting  CPAP, saying, yeah, no one ever uses this thing, stuff like that. That's basically like saying  their baby is ugly. So you probably don't want to do that. So CPAP, great treatment if they  can stand it. And there are things underway to help people. Well, there's been things hap -  pening for years to help people be more compliant with their CPAP.  [0:37:23]  Many, many, many different masks for the CPAP. And again, if you work with a really good  durable medical equipment company, and usually one that's focused on helping people  with sleep apnea, the success is higher. The outcomes are better. So Dr. Kuehne that runs  our Boise practice, he owns a CPAP company with a local sleep doctor and a few others in  the Boise areas. Has owned that now for many years. And their compliance rate is legiti -  mately 90%. Well, you might hear that from others. You may hear doctors be like, oh yeah,  90% of my patients use their CPAP. And then it's weird because you look in the literature  and it always says 50% and stuff, right? But this one, it's for real.  [0:38:12]  Their 90% is for real. And why that is, is because they spend a lot of time working with the  patient and a lot of time following up. And if they see that they're... So nowadays these  machines are connected to the internet. They're letting the doctor know if there's a mask  leak. The machine lets the doctor know if the patient's not using it. The machine lets them  know if there's any problems, if the AHI is creeping up, if the pressure needs to be  changed. Very sophisticated. This is like you got your reverse vacuum cleaner there con -  nected to your MacBook Pro every night. And CPAP is kind of like an every night sleep  study as far as airway is concerned. The machine can tell if there's a blockage or not. It  can blow a little harder if there's an apnea or hypopnea. Pretty cool stuff. Now, with that  data, if that data just goes nowhere, then it's really not going to help anybody. But if you  work with a good DME company, they'll be the ones reaching out to the patient. Hey we  see that you haven't worn your CPAP for the last four or five days. Is there anything we  can do for you? Stuff like that.  [0:39:20]  Okay, so work with a great DME company, or for one or two of you that watch this video,  who knows, maybe you're the one that needs to work in your local community to get good  DME, as in you might even own the DME company in order to be the one that provides  non-surgical care. We just had a business elite meeting this past weekend, and there was  a dentist there that is likely going to do that, where they will focus on all things non-surgi -  cal, being CPAP or oral appliance therapy, and then other people can do the surgical type  approaches.  09/01/25   Page   of 11   16

SSC 2.0 - 113: Diagnosis of Sleep Apnea  Management of Snoring and Obstructive Sleep Apnea   [0:39:59]  All right, and with that segue, let's talk about the dentist's role in management of snoring  and obstructive sleep apnea. Now, note the word here, management. I don't always love  using the word management. We're surgeons, right? So we don't tend to manage stuff. We  tend to fix it, and this is something that we don't tend to fix, per se. So yes, you'll have pa -  tients that use oral appliance therapy, and their AHI goes to zero, but you're still managing  it because they have to use it every night. Right? So that's managing it. Now, there aren't  good cures for this either, so don't think that orthognathic surgery or palatal expansion or  whatever is going to cure it forever, and I've told you my story from my son Jeff that got his  tonsils and adenoids out, and it did have a cure at the moment, and then adenoids came  back and other things happened. So managing sleep apnea right now is kind of the best  we can do versus curing. There will be some people that they have a cure for a short peri -  od of time with surgeries, with weight loss, with things like that, but as they get older and  floppier, these things can come back. So a little bit of a mental shift for you on this, that  normally as a dentist, you don't manage stuff, okay? You might manage periodontal dis -  ease, but a lot of you don't do that. You get that to the periodontist because you don't like  managing stuff, right? You like fixing stuff. Okay? This is not something that you get to fix  in the same way, and that does require you to think a little bit differently about this or you're  going to be disappointed.  [0:41:38]  Okay, were you aware, if you've been a member of Spencer Study Club for a long time,  you know this already, but if you just joined, then this might surprise you that the American  Dental Association has asked all dentists since 2017 to be screening patients for sleep-re -  lated breathing disorders. So you can find this online, or of course, you've got it here, kind  of gives some definitions and whatnot, and then it says, as we get down here, the dentist's  role in treatment of sleep-related breathing disorders includes the following. Dentists are  encouraged to screen patients as part of your comprehensive medical and dental exami -  nation, and then some of the things that you might look for on that screening. Next, in chil -  dren, screening through history and clinical examination may identify signs and symptoms  of deficient growth and development, other risk factors. If these things are determined,  then referral for medical, dental referral, evidence-based treatment may be appropriate,  looking at that in kiddos. Next, oral appliance therapy is appropriate treatment for mild to  moderate sleep apnea and for severe sleep apnea when CPAP's not tolerated by the pa -  tient. Next, when oral appliance therapy is prescribed by a physician through written or  electronic order for an adult patient with obstructive sleep apnea, a dentist should evaluate  the patient for the appropriateness of fabricating a suitable oral appliance.  [0:42:49]  09/01/25   Page   of 12   16

SSC 2.0 - 113: Diagnosis of Sleep Apnea  If deemed appropriate, a dentist should fabricate an oral appliance. Now, this bullet point  gives some dentists pause here. Now, I wasn't involved in writing these guidelines. I'm  pretty sure I know some of the people who were, and I don't fault them for this. However,  there's oftentimes a little intermingling of what's sort of like legal and within our scope of  practice, what's the right thing to do, so to speak, and what insurance requires. This one  here is a little bit more of an insurance thing. So you, by your licensure as a dentist, are  100% fine prescribing an oral appliance for your patient for their sleep apnea and snoring.  Now, if you're in the United States, that's not going to get covered by insurance. If you do it  that way, you're going to need a prescription. But as far as a dentist using oral appliance  therapy to help their patients, that's fine. Now, having said that, particularly because this is  here, particularly because this is in print from the American Dental Association, I'm going  to encourage you to try to always have a prescription for an oral appliance for snoring or  sleep apnea. Now, we'll talk about this in just a bit. But if you're treating the patient for their  bruxism, then that's all you. Never in your career have you like, hey, cardiologist, mind if I  treat this patient with a night guard? And you're not going to start. You're not going to be  calling the sleep doctor every time that someone has bruxism, even though that's a sleep  disorder.  [0:44:37]  So that's listed in the sleep disorders. You're not calling a sleep doctor to be like, hey, you  cool with a night guard? So that's not something we do. It's not something we've ever  done, not something anyone would think you should do. Sleep apnea and snoring is on  the radar screen there. Now, note in this bullet point, it says for an adult with obstructive  sleep apnea. So it doesn't say anything about snoring. And this is sleep-related breathing  disorders. So snoring isn't specifically mentioned. So could you be okay if you were treat -  ing, "just snoring?" I wouldn't take the risk if I were you because there's no way you would  know if they have sleep apnea or not. So here, and I'll cover this more later, but just to  make sure I don't hit this and you're like, oh, shoot, what am I supposed to do? I'm seeing  a patient tomorrow.  [0:45:27]  What I would do if I were you is if you have a patient that you know has sleep apnea, then  yes, work with their doctor. At the very least, call their primary care doctor. Hey, primary  care doctor, you may know this already. Patient's not using their CPAP, common patient.  I'd like to do an oral appliance for him for his sleep apnea. Do you think that's okay? Yes, I  do. Great. Could you do me a huge favor? The American Dental Association strongly en -  courages us to work with our medical colleagues like you and likes us to get a prescription  from the physician so that everything's on the same page here. Would that be okay? If  they say no, which is, I've never had that happen, but let's say that they say, no, I'm not  really comfortable with that, and say, okay, but just to confirm, you are cool with doing an  oral appliance or do you really think that the patient needs to be back on their CPAP? Like,  I would straight out say that sentence right there. So you're cool with me doing an oral ap -  pliance or you think they should be back on their CPAP? Question mark. If they say, well, I  really think she could be back on their CPAP, then I would say, hey, patient, you need to go  09/01/25   Page   of 13   16

SSC 2.0 - 113: Diagnosis of Sleep Apnea  back to your doctor, talk to your doctor, try CPAP again, whatever. Do not put yourself at  risk of treating this patient against the will of their medical doctor.  [0:46:46]  That would be dumb. Okay. But if they say, no, no, I'm cool with it. That's fine. I think writ -  ing a script for you is weird, but I'm totally fine with it. Great. Then I would document in the  chart that you had the conversation with the physician. And I probably wouldn't say in there  physician refused to write an order or something. I would just say the physician said to go  ahead and fit the patient with an oral appliance. Okay, so have that documentation in your  notes that you did what you're supposed to do as this fourth bullet point here. Okay, mov -  ing on. Five, dentists should obtain appropriate patient consent for treatment that reviews  the proposed treatment plan, all available options, any potential side effects. Next bullet  point, dentists treating sleep-related breathing disorders with oral appliance therapy should  be capable of recognizing and managing the potential side effects through treatment or  proper referral. Hey, that's why you're here. So that's why we talk about potential side ef -  fects, how to avoid those side effects, most importantly, and then how to deal with those  side effects if they do occur. Moving on, dentists who provide oral appliance therapy to pa -  tients should monitor and adjust the oral appliance for treatment efficacy as needed or at  least annually.  [0:47:54]  Okay, so this is part of that management thing, right? So we're going to make sure it's  working and we're going to see them annually to make sure it's continuing to work. Next,  this is important part here, as titration of oral appliances has been shown to affect the final  treatment outcome and overall oral appliance success. The use of unattended cardiorespi -  ratory type three or type four portable monitors, otherwise called home sleep tests, may be  used by the dentist to help define the optimal target position of the manible, a dentist  trained in the use of these portable monitoring devices may assess the objective interim  results for the purposes of OA titration. Okay, so this is saying dentists are cool to use  home sleep testing as part of this adjustment titration of the oral appliance. Now, I've al -  ready told you that.  [0:48:42]  I wouldn't do that if I were you. I would just use SnoreLab and I would have the physicians  do this step because they'll get paid for it. You won't. So that's my take on this. Again, re -  member, we did it all. We've done all of this. We've done type three, type four. We've done  all of this stuff over the years. It's a waste of your time, frankly. You're going to know just  based on SnoreLab and how the patient's doing. That's enough. And then I would work  with my physician colleagues to say, hey, why don't I get them back to you? And then we  do the testing from you and you're going to get covered by that by insurance and every -  thing else. And if we need to do it multiple times, you're going to get covered by insurance  and everything rather than me just doing it on my own dime for the patient and having to  manage all of this stuff. But the ADA says you can. So if you really want to do that, you're  cool. As of recording this in 2025, the only state that I'm currently aware of that says den -  tists can't do this is New Jersey. That may have changed by the time you see this.  09/01/25   Page   of 14   16

SSC 2.0 - 113: Diagnosis of Sleep Apnea  [0:49:44]  So check. So if you happen to be in Jersey, then you would want to find that out. But as of  this recording, that's the only state that makes it that dentists cannot do home sleep test -  ing. Next, surgical procedures may be considered as a secondary treatment for OSA when  CPAP or OAT is inadequate or not tolerated. In selected cases, such as patients with con -  comitant dental facial deformities, surgical intervention may be considered as a primary  treatment. So in other words, orthognathic surgery, palate expansion, surgical palate ex -  pansion, stuff like that may be considered as either complementary treatment or primary  treatment. Next, dentists treating sleep-related breathing disorders should continually up -  date their knowledge and training for dental sleep medicine with related continuing educa -  tion. Hey, you're doing that here right now, aren't you? Dentists should maintain regular  communications with the patient's referring physician and other healthcare providers to the  patient's treatment progress and any recommended follow-up treatment. Absolutely. And  then last, follow-up sleep testing by a physician should be conducted to evaluate the im -  provement or confirm treatment efficacy for the OSA, especially if the patient develops re -  curring OSA, relevant symptoms, or comorbidities. So here's the follow-up sleep testing by  the physician.  [0:50:52]  Now, frankly, physicians couldn't care less what the American Dental Association thinks  about this. So funny to me almost that they even put this in the guidelines because the  guidelines are for us dentists, not for physicians. But nevertheless, not a bad thing that you  could even share this with a physician you might work with and say, hey, yeah, here's kind  of how we separate this. Like here's what I do. I screen. I refer. You do the test to get them  diagnosed in the first place. You refer them back. I do an oral appliance. Now it says right  here that I could do the home sleep testing and stuff while during the titration. I don't want  to do that. You do that. You're going to get paid for that by Blue Cross. And then ultimately,  we need to make sure that everything's working. That's you too. Okay? So that is 2017  that that was published.  CPAP Treatment   [0:51:41]  Now with CPAP treatment, we blow the airway open, like I said, with oral appliance treat -  ment, we keep the jaw from falling backwards or we bring it forward a little bit. I always say  it this way. So with oral appliance therapy, we keep the jaw from falling backwards or we  bring it forward a little bit.   This is Alan Lowe made this a long time ago. So this just kind of  shows the airway. The airway is the blue part. The white is the mandible going away. And  with oral appliance therapy, note that the airway can get bigger in an AP dimension as well  as lateral. The images of the cone beam CT, that's my airway. And that you see again, not  just an AP change, but a lateral change. The flow is determined. So this is the flow equa -  09/01/25   Page   of 15   16

SSC 2.0 - 113: Diagnosis of Sleep Apnea  tion that you may have actually learned in physics in undergrad. But see the R to the four  on the top. So as we change the radius of that tube, the flow is changed exponentially. So  just a little difference in the size of the tube makes a big, big, big difference in the flow. No -  tice underneath this is the L for length. One of the reasons that women get missed is that  they're thin, but the doctor doesn't take into account this formula, this equation, in that the  length of the airway makes a big difference. So if you picture in your mind a ballerina, you  would picture a woman with a longer neck, right?  [0:53:19]  It's just the way it is. And when they have that long neck, they have a longer airway. A  longer airway is more collapsible. So even though you might change the diameter of that  airway at some point, we still have that length to deal with. Whereas this is one of the rea -  sons that sometimes you'll have massive success with fatter men with short necks is you  just keep that jaw from falling back. You make that little change in the airway. They got a  really short airway in the first place and it becomes non-collapsible. So they may go from  literally an AHI of 100 to zero. And that's why. You made it a little bit bigger, can't collapse  anymore, boom, that's it. So keep that in mind. What is our role in all of this? Well, life-  threatening medical disorder. We don't diagnose sleep apnea. The diagnosis is made by a  physician as of the time that I'm recording this anyway. Maybe that will change in the fu -  ture. I'm not sure. We screen and refer. We provide and monitor appliance therapy. We  monitor and treat potential side effects and we follow up with the patient lifelong.  [0:54:34]  These are the guidelines published back in 2015 when the American Academy of Sleep  Medicine and the American Academy of Dental Sleep Medicine were together. A few years  after this, they separated and not necessarily the happiest separation with that. This has  nothing to do necessarily with the relationships between sleep doctors and dentists, good  dentists in their community or in your community. But these are the guidelines that they  published back then. As of the recording of this, nothing, well, the American Academy of  Dental Sleep Medicine has additional guidelines. These are the guidelines that most  physicians and insurance companies, medical directors that are making decisions would  look at still in 2025. Other indications for oral appliance therapy? Well, as an adjunct to  CPAP, for example, during travel or when electricity is not readily available, like camping,  stuff like that. In combination with CPAP to reduce the pressure and maybe get them on a  different mask. And then maybe as a predictor of success for bimax advancement or or -  thognathic surgery. If you have an adult that's considering orthognathic surgery, then  maybe you could do an oral appliance in advance, make sure that it is wildly successful.  And then perhaps that would give you and the surgeons a better idea of what they could  expect with that orthognathic surgery.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 16   16

