SSC 2.0 - 114: Screening Your Patients  SSC 2.0   Level 1  114: Screening Your Patients  [intro music]  Screening Your Patients   [0:00:12]  Let's talk now about screening your patients. So how do we best screen for obstructive  sleep apnea? As we've discussed, through the history is a major aspect of this, and I gave  you the, so I think you might have sleep apnea, which is snoring and witnessed apneas or  obstructions. So those two questions really are the main ones. If they don't snore, if they  have a bed partner who's never noticed them stopping breathing, they could still have  sleep apnea, but it's much less likely that they would. And they would probably, if they  have anything at all, and I'll explain the air quotes there in a second, it's going to be mild or  so-called upper airway resistance syndrome. Is that important? Well, of course it's impor -  tant. And depending on what you're seeing that patient for, if it is their bruxism, they're  wearing down their teeth, maybe they have a TMJ problem and you're seeing them, there  may be a reason to get a sleep study just on the suspicion that they could have a problem  and letting them know in advance, you know, your doctor and the sleep doctors and what -  not, they're going to tell you, you actually don't have a problem unless you have more than  five events per hour.  [0:01:32]  And then you use the analogy I use of, hey, do you got a dog? What if your dog woke you  up two or three times per hour? How would you feel? How do you think you would feel?  Well, what if your sleep was being disturbed just a few times an hour? Do you think that  that could actually have a negative consequence with your overall health? And of course,  they're going to be like, well, yeah. So I'm going to refer you for this consultation and a  possible sleep study. But if you have a sleep study, I don't expect that you're going to  come back with some severe level of sleep apnea. It's probably going to be more so-called  mild, but mild doesn't mean mild symptoms. I would explain that to the patient. Excessive  daytime sleepiness or fatigue. We'll talk about that more in a second. Comorbidities, hy -  pertension, gastroesophageal reflux, headaches, cerebral arterial disorders, bruxism. All of  these things are commonly associated with obstructive sleep apnea and things that you  can pick up pretty easily in your office.  OSA Risk Factors   [0:02:37]  09/01/25   Page   of 1   12

SSC 2.0 - 114: Screening Your Patients  More risk factors or included risk factors. We have our BMI. We have big necks. We have  high arch palate. We have retrognathia and a mallampati class three or four airway. Now,  mallampati was created for difficult intubation. That is what it is for. It is sticking the tongue  out. There's something called the Friedman index, which is the exact same thing with the  tongue in the mouth. I would use mallampati because your ear, nose and throat doctors,  sleep doctors, they use mallampati. You don't have to have the patient really stick their  tongue out, though. That's not necessary. Just bottom line. Can you see down their throat  or not? If you can easily see down their throat, then that's class one. I can see down a lit -  tle, two. I really can't see down at all, three. And I for sure can't see down. That's a four.  Those with class three and four are as a risk factor for obstructive sleep apnea. Now,  these things are risk factors. Are there people that are obese that don't have sleep apnea?  Yeah. Are there people that are retrognathic that don't have sleep apnea? Sure. Are there  people with a high arch palate that don't have sleep apnea? You bet. Are there people with  big necks that don't have sleep apnea? Yeah. Just risk factors. The more risk factors a  person has, the more likely they are to have a problem.  Epworth Sleepiness Scale   [0:03:49]  Epworth Sleepiness Scale. The sleep doc friend of mine from the military, Dr. Lettieri,  called this the ep-worthlessness scale. And that's because his clientele is an army sleep  doctor. They weren't likely to doze off or fall asleep. So the thing I kind of hate about the  Epworth Sleepiness Scale is it's misnamed. It should not be called a sleepiness scale. It  should be called the epworth doziness scale. How likely you do to doze off or fall asleep in  the following situations. So let the patient fill this out. And if they score above 11, then that  is considered excessive daytime somnolence. On the other hand, if they don't score above  11, you can follow up and say, so I see that you're not falling asleep on a regular basis, but  how often do you feel fatigued? Oh my gosh, I feel fatigued all the time. I'm so tired all the  time. I just don't fall asleep. Women are less likely to doze off or fall asleep. Men are more  likely to doze off or fall asleep. When I lecture, it is extremely rare for me to have women  fall asleep in my lecture. It is extremely common for men to fall asleep in my lecture, espe -  cially if I'm speaking in the afternoon, just the way it is.  [0:04:58]  So sometimes we'll give people the Epworth Sleepiness Scale and just let them fill it out  on their own. And then if I see that it's a below 11 number and the patient's talking about  being fatigued, being tired all the time, then I may basically throw it away and have them  fill it out again with the question actually being zero is no chance of feeling sleepier fa -  tigued. Three is high chance of feeling sleepier fatigued in that situation. I believe when we  do that in our offices, we create an actual sleepiness scale because we're asking about  being sleepy, not asking about doziness. Who cares? The reason we care about this is  because Medicare and a lot of insurance companies care about this. Many insurance  09/01/25   Page   of 2   12

SSC 2.0 - 114: Screening Your Patients  companies in the United States, if the patient is mild sleep apnea, has an HI below 15,  they have to have something else wrong. They have to have an excessive daytime sleepi -  ness, which is an Epworth Sleepiness Scale of 11 or higher, for example. So that's a rea -  son that you might have them fill this out and ask them those questions. Now, typically, if  you are a referral-based practice like I am, most of our patients have already had sleep  studies and gave up on CPAP and all that stuff.  [0:06:20]  So the Epworth Sleepiness Scale was already done at the sleep doctor's office by the time  they get to me. However, if you're screening your patients in your dental practice, then  yeah, they've never filled this out before. So you can, again, you're not doing anything in -  appropriate here, I don't believe. You're not coaching them. You don't tell them, hey, by the  way, in order for your insurance to pay for stuff, you're going to need a score of 11 or high -  er. You would never say that, of course. But what I think it is appropriate to say, hey, this  says doze off or fall asleep. Do you doze off or fall asleep much? Now, again, if a woman  says, oh yeah, man, I've fallen asleep at the wheel. I have a hard time staying awake in  meetings in the afternoon, especially those Zoom meetings and stuff like that. I have to  turn my camera off sometimes because I catch myself falling asleep in the meeting. Okay,  they say that, then they almost for sure have sleep apnea or there's something else going  on. Obviously, there's lots of things that can make us sleepy other than just an airway is -  sue.  STOP BANG   [0:07:20]  But focus in on that fatigue, that sleepiness, not just doziness. That's really the bottom line.  STOP-Bang was invented around 2008. You see the reference there. And this was created  by anesthesiologists. And the anesthesiologists came up with the STOP-Bang because  they were sick and tired of people dying in the post-operative care unit. That sounds kind  of crazy, but what anesthesiologist's job doesn't just end necessarily at the end of the pro -  cedure. They're responsible for that patient for a while. And in the post-operative care unit,  a lot of post-operative care unit nurses, their main job is keeping people's jaws from falling  backwards. And this can be a major issue. And the anesthesiologists are also protecting  airways in surgery. Now, obviously, they've got a lot of people intubated, things like that.  But particularly after the surgery, when the person is extubated, there can be airway is -  sues. And they thought, you know, before these people come in for these surgeries, we  should have some sort of screening that could help us know in advance if they're going to  have a problem. So let's go through the STOP-Bang and see if you can tell who the STOP-  Bang is looking for.  [0:08:47]  All right, so STOP. Snore, tired, obstruction, pressure. Do you snore loudly? Do you often  feel tired, fatigued, or sleepy during the day? Has anyone observed you stop breathing  09/01/25   Page   of 3   12

SSC 2.0 - 114: Screening Your Patients  during your sleep? There's those SO questions again, right? Do you have or are you being  treated for high blood pressure? So on the STOP part, these could apply to anyone. Male,  female, old, young. Anybody could have the STOP part of the STOP-Bang apply to them.  Okay, next, the BANG part. BMI. Is your body mass index greater than 28? Age. Are you  over 50? Neck. If you're a guy, do you have over 17-inch neck? Or if you're a woman, over  16-inch? Gender. Are you male? Okay, who's the STOP-Bang looking for? That's right, fat  old man. I call this test the STOP fat old man. That is who the STOP-Bang is looking for.  So based on the STOP-Bang, if you are a woman under 50 that's not significantly over -  weight, you don't have sleep apnea. Okay, does that seem like, huh, that doesn't seem  right? I'm sure that there are women under 50 who are not significantly overweight who  have sleep apnea. Yeah, I've treated lots and lots and lots and lots of them.  [0:10:10]  They're not going to get picked up on the STOP-Bang. So the problem with screening  tools like this, like the STOP-Bang, is it's not that it's invalid. It's just really looking for the  low-hanging fruit. It's looking for the people that are almost for sure going to have sleep  apnea. And again, you can see the thought process there when this is in a surgical type of  environment. Someone's coming in to get their hip replaced. You want to know if they've  got this problem before this because not only is it going to be risky for them right around  the procedure in the post-operative care unit and stuff, but then what happens when they  go home? What happens when they go home and they're put on Percocet, which already  depresses the respiratory system? Is it possible that they could die? Yeah, it's possible  they could die at home. Did you know that's the most common place for people to die after  a big surgery? It's not in the hospital. Hospital has all the stuff to monitor them and to take  action if something happens. But what happens when they go home? That's the problem.  So I don't fault them for creating this, but the problem is if you are not a woman over 50  that's overweight, you're not going to score on the STOP-Bang.  [0:11:30]  And so therefore your doctor is going to be like, oh, yep, you must not have a problem. If  you are a woman who isn't typically falling asleep in the middle of the day, you're not going  to score high on the Epworth sleepiness or what should be called doziness scale. So this  is just another example of kind of missing women in the calculations here. So this is the  screening questionnaire that we use. This is in your document center as a word document.  So you can modify this if you want to. I'll go through and explain why we have everything  on here that we do, but feel free to modify this to your heart's content. So we have our  Epworth Sleepiness Scale up here, and this is unadulterated from the Epworth Sleepiness  Scale. How likely are you to doze off or fall asleep in the following situation in contrast to  just feeling tired? And then we've got our zero through three. And those are the eight ques -  tions of the Epworth Sleepiness Scale. So that is as normally written with the Epworth  Sleepiness Scale. Then down here we have, have you ever been diagnosed with, and  those first six questions are the kind of Medicare, do you have something else wrong  questions?  [0:12:39]  09/01/25   Page   of 4   12

SSC 2.0 - 114: Screening Your Patients  So we can have an excessive daytime somnolence of an Epworth Sleepiness Scale score  of 11 or higher. So that would be one of the things that if someone has an HI below 15,  that could be one of the things that Medicare will say, okay, we'll go ahead and treat this.  Now on the six, they would mark down that they maybe have a problem. That's not likely  going to be good enough. So you would want to see that their doctor has diagnosed them  with this problem, is treating them for this problem in order to have documentation that's  going to support this person being treated. Now, typically, again, this is done for you once  they get to the sleep doctor world, part of this. Even if you're doing distant telemedicine  stuff and HSTs and things like that, still kind of their job. Why we use this as our screening  form is because this is all stuff that we know medical doctors ask, that we know insurance  companies look for, things like that. So we're just kind of reinforcing that so that we're mak -  ing a good case for the patient to be covered by their insurance.  [0:13:51]  That's why we use it. But again, if you're a practice like ours where people are referred in,  this has all been done. We still give it to them though. We still give it to them in order to  have it in our records. All right, so back to the thing here. Impaired cognition, mood disor -  der or depression, insomnia, hypertension, high blood pressure, ischemic heart disease,  coronary artery disease or arteriosclerosis, history of stroke. So one of those six things  and or, excuse me, excessive daytime somnolence. So there's seven things, let's see, can  I make seven? Seven things that they could have in addition to an HI of five to 15 that  would then say Medicare would then say, all right, you got mild sleep apnea. We got one  of these other problems too. Therefore, we will go ahead and treat it. Not all insurance  companies work that way, by the way. Many insurance companies will just cover mild  sleep apnea without other stuff having been diagnosed. Medicare though, typically it's if  the HI is between five and 15, there needs to be something else. And now that's, you could  draw a line there so that above their kind of insurance stuff.  [0:15:05]  Next is sleep apnea. So do you have sleep apnea or have you been diagnosed with sleep  apnea? Seven, yes or no. If yes, did you try to use CPAP? And obviously this is going to  be important to you for the low hanging fruit of patients who have already been diagnosed  with sleep apnea. Tried CPAP, failed, that's someone that you don't need to run down the  sleep study road and all that kind of stuff necessarily. You might for various reasons, but  they've already done all that stuff. So possibly you could just jump straight to therapy, kind  of depending on how long ago that was, how much weight they've gained, things like that.  Eight, TMJ problems, significant enough to require treatment. So note that and why I wrote  it that way is a lot of insurance companies will not pay for treatment with oral appliance  therapy if the patient has TMJ. And be careful with that because on your normal dental pa -  perwork and stuff, you might have, do you have TMJ? Have you ever had a TMJ problem?  And the patient's like, yes, and there's no notes on what that means. And if the insurance  company gets sent that paper, they'll deny oral appliance therapy because they'll say, hey,  FDA says you can't treat this person with an oral appliance if they have a TMJ problem.  09/01/25   Page   of 5   12

SSC 2.0 - 114: Screening Your Patients  [0:16:26]  So we've got it on there already, significant enough to require treatment. And then if they  mark that and they say yes, then we're going to put in the margin there, patient is currently  stable or there has not had a TMJ problem for many years or whatever. Or if we're treating  them for their TMJ problem, then we might address the TMJ problem first. But typically  we're going to make a little notation there. If they mark yes, explaining what that really  means. Gastric reflux. Are you aware of or have you been told that you snore, feel tired or  fatigued, clench or grind your teeth, have frequent headaches, your neck size being  greater than 17 inches or 16 inches, in a female, anyone in your family having sleep ap -  nea, stopping breathing when sleeping slash awaking with a gasp? So within that portion,  we have some of these STOP-Bang questions. Then we've got some questions for kiddos,  obviously filled out by the parent or the guardian. Are you aware of your child snoring, hav -  ing noisy breathing while sleeping, grinding his or her teeth? If you remember back into  level one, those are the two I got bolded, right?  [0:17:32]  Bruxism, snoring. If a kid has evidence of bruxism and mom or dad says that kid snores,  that kid's got sleep apnea until proven otherwise. You can go back and watch that part  again, but just remember my paradigm on that is you get that kid to a pediatric sleep doc -  tor. Yep, they might need to get in a car and drive for a while to get to a university that has  a pediatric sleep doctor. Get them to a pediatric sleep doctor. Don't just go to the pediatri -  cian. Don't just go to the ENT unless you're lucky enough to have a pediatrician or an ENT  in your area that totally gets it. If you don't, send them to the pediatric sleep doctor. They  will get a sleep study and then we'll have an accurate diagnosis. And remember, a child  with an HI of one and above is considered abnormal in kids. As I record this, my 17-year-  old is going to have a sleep study probably this week. And man, do I hope he has sleep  apnea because that kid is tired all the time, sleeps for a million hours a day it seems like.  Now granted, he's a normal teenager, which means on his flipping phone all the time, play -  ing video games, staying up too late, all that kind of stuff.  [0:18:41]  But he's also gained some weight, which most of my kids, particularly at his age, were not  overweight at all. And his cognitively is great. He's real smart. But still, just like with any -  one, I hope he has sleep apnea because if he does, it's easy to treat. Now I mentioned  he's 17 years old. Theoretically, if his HI comes back anything above one, that is abnormal  because he's still technically a child for health reasons. So under 18 is considered a child.  And so we will kind of use that. So if he comes back with an HI of two or three, we will  make a case that he should be treated. And as in all kids, my paradigm is tonsil ade -  noidectomy. So we're going to get those tonsils and adenoids out in a 17-year-old. Hope  like crazy that that makes a huge difference for him. And if it doesn't, then we'll treat ac -  cordingly with oral appliance therapy or CPAP or whatever. But that's my 17-year-old.  Again, the reason I bring that up is if I waited until November when he'll be 18, now he's an  adult and he would have to have an HI over five.  [0:19:51]  09/01/25   Page   of 6   12

SSC 2.0 - 114: Screening Your Patients  That makes no sense, but those are the rules. All right, so back to the kiddos, snoring,  bruxism, wetting their bed, having difficulty in school or with learning, being treated for  ADD, ADHD, breathing primarily through their mouth, having frequent nightmares or night  tears, having frequent earaches. All right, so the goal here is the patient and or the parent  fill this out and then we've got some data there. And remember back before on the other  screening to kind of find a follow-up there, you make the connection of, hey, we're doing  this because the American Dental Association asked us to since 2017. This is kind of like  screening for head and neck cancer. And you can say, hey, looks like you're doing great.  Got a bunch of no's here. You're never sleepy and stuff like that during the day. Good for  you. That's awesome. Thank you for filling this out for us. And then the patient will often  say, well, you're asking the wrong person. You should be talking to my husband. You  should be talking to my dad. You should be talking to my boyfriend. You should be talking  to someone else.  [0:20:58]  And then you say, you know what? I'd love to talk to him about that. Here, let me give you  another one of these. And let me kind of, let me give you one. I'll fill out some numbers  here. All of these, if it's a yes, that's a problem. This thing up here at the top, if it's any  number over 11 or higher, that's considered clinically excessive daytime sleepiness. That's  bad news. So you could give that to your spouse, your dad, your boyfriend, your whoever,  see what they score. On the kiddos, sometimes if they do score a couple yeses there, and  particularly if it's wetting the bed, stuff like that, you might pull mom or dad out in the hall  and have a little heart-to-heart there because nine-year-old Johnny doesn't want to hear  his mom talking to his dentist about him wetting the bed, right on. So I would take that to a  private place, talk a little bit about that, see what's going on. Then at the bottom, we have  some dental exam findings here just to remind you or your hygienist or whoever it is that is  your dental associates or whoever it is that is going through this screening process to look  for some of the stuff in the mouth.  [0:22:04]  So evidence of bruxism, tori or bone loss. So note both. Tori, bone builders, bone loss,  bone breaker downers. Remember that periodontal disease is associated with a higher  risk of sleep apnea. People with periodontal disease more likely to have sleep apnea. So  either of those, bone builders, bone breaker downers. Scalloping to the border of the  tongue, anterior wear, putting their jaw out on those front teeth and typically they're not  aware of coming out on their front teeth but they've got worn down anteriors. In my mind,  that is them for sure bringing their jaw forward to protect their airway so they don't die.  Crowded airway, as in can't see down their throat. mallampati class 3 or 4, retrognathia or  class 2. So they are retrognathic. All the different stuff that we see in the mouth, and you  see all this stuff on a regular basis. These are some pretty dramatic representations of  these things, and I know you've seen this before, but the scalloped borders of the tongue,  note the front chipped teeth here, and that's the same person. And again, this is a woman,  likely looks like a woman, and let's say that she's thin and that she's young.  09/01/25   Page   of 7   12

SSC 2.0 - 114: Screening Your Patients  [0:23:17]  She's got sleep apnea. So she's coming out on those front teeth, the tongue is just like,  gotta get out of here. So the scalloped borders of the tongue is the tongue trying to escape  out of the airway, but the teeth are together, held together. She's out there on her front  teeth, breaking off the front teeth. This person, you do veneers on those front teeth, they  are gonna pop off. And what does the brain care more about? Air or pretty front teeth?  Well, probably air. So still treat the front teeth, right? Still take care, restore the front teeth.  This person's getting married in a couple of weeks. Can't just let her have these chipped  front teeth, restore them, but talk about what does the brain care most about here? Let's  go ahead and cosmetically make this look nice, but let's set up an appointment after your  wedding to talk about what could have caused this in the first place. See those marks  across your tongue? See how I don't have those marks across my tongue? Or if you do,  you say, see how I have those too? That's our tongues trying to escape out of our airway.  [0:24:16]  Remember too that we are doing kind of a nasal evaluation here. We're not ear, nose and  throat doctors, but we don't have to be. You're just asking them questions about are they  able to breathe through their nose? If they're not, so nasal sleep apnea is not necessarily a  thing because the person would open their mouth. On the other hand, breathing through a  narrowed nasal airway changes the pressure in your airway, in your oropharyngeal airway.  So if they are breathing through their nose, not through their mouth, if they have their lips  closed and they're breathing and it's real tight there in their nose, it's going to cause a  negative pressure there which could collapse the airway more likely. And remember, when  they're obstructing, it's it's on the in, it's not on the out. You don't have obstructive apnea,  it's on the exhale, it's on the inhalation. That's why inspire works on the inspiration. That's  when it shocks the tongue to move it forward, it's on the inhale. So watch for that. If it is  the nose, then that's awesome because an ear, nose and throat doctor can take care of  that, give them a better nasal airway and usually that's going to, or oftentimes that can  take care of their problem.  [0:25:28]  Here we have someone with a bunch of stuff, so we got the big tori and that's, in my opin -  ion, that is bone builders, that's someone putting down extra bone probably because of  excessive forces on their teeth and note the anterior wear in that same patient. And then  here we have someone with a high arch palate which often means too that they have a  deviated septum. Not all the time, I have a high arch palate, don't have a deviated septum,  but oftentimes if you see someone with a high arch palate and they are normocephalic, not  dococephalic, not long face like me, they will have a deviated septum.  Periodontal Disease and OSA   [0:26:06]  09/01/25   Page   of 8   12

SSC 2.0 - 114: Screening Your Patients  Mentioned this a second ago, but periodontal disease and obstructive sleep apnea have  been correlated. In this study, they had a big bunch of participants, 687 people in the  study, 17.5% of those people had periodontitis as defined by a clinical attachment level  greater than 6 millimeters and probing pocketing depth of greater than 4 millimeters. 46%  of these patients had obstructive sleep apnea, but 60% of those diagnosed with periodon -  titis had obstructive sleep apnea. So said another way, if you had periodontal disease,  15% more likely to have obstructive sleep apnea.  SNORE Acronym   [0:26:47]  My new screening acronym is, do you SNORE? So SNORE is the acronym, easy to re -  member, easy to teach all of your staff members. Hey, we're going to ask people, do they  SNORE? SNORE is an acronym. S stands for, do you SNORE? N is, can you breathe  through your nose? O is, has anyone ever noticed you stop breathing when you sleep?  Obstructions. R is reflux. Do they have gastric reflux, heartburn? E is everything else. Is  there anything else going on? And remember, the S and the O are kind of the most impor -  tant here, so you could just kind of be like, so, I think you have sleep apnea. Just teach  your staff that. Just teach them, so. So, I think you might have sleep apnea. Do you  SNORE? Obstructions. Has anyone ever noticed you stop breathing when you sleep?  Now, if they say, hey, I don't got a bed partner that can tell me if I'm snoring or not, then  SnoreLab. SnoreLab's free version will give them a few weeks, I think, of recording, and  they're going to know if they're snoring or not. If they are snoring and we're taking them  down this road of obstructive sleep apnea diagnosis and whatnot, then I would have them  get a paid account so that we can start collecting data.  [0:27:57]  And then once we treat them with oral appliance therapy, we'll have that going for us, too.  And remember, too, with your cone-beam CTs, I know a lot of you have cone-beam CT  now because you got it for dental implants and for other stuff, or maybe you've been doing  sleep and TMD for a bit, and so you have it for that, but we do evaluate the airway. Now,  this is sitting up awake in our cone-beam CT machine, and is it possible that even a small  airway sitting up awake will not be a collapsible airway when sleeping? You bet. However,  to put it in perspective, you know, this little white dot here is 1.2 millimeters, and to put that  in further perspective, the little coffee stir straws are 2.6 millimeters in diameter. So that  coffee stir straw is twice the diameter of that airway that we just had on that cone-beam  CT. So is it possible that that patient's jaw could fall back a whole millimeter when they're  asleep? Yeah, I think that is. Now again, I don't diagnose the airway or sleep apnea from a  cone-beam CT, but use all the tools that are available to you when you're doing your  screening.  09/01/25   Page   of 9   12

SSC 2.0 - 114: Screening Your Patients  Oral Appliance for the Management of Snoring and OSA   [0:29:11]  Now let's get into oral appliances for the management of snoring obstructive sleep apnea.  I know you're super stoked about talking about oral appliances. Maybe you even skipped  already to like level two to talk about oral appliances and stuff. And now you're coming  back to level one because you're like, oh, maybe I should look at level one. But we're go -  ing to talk about the nuts and bolts and the most important things with oral appliance ther -  apy. And then I'll go into more detail in level two as I take you from initial screen to final fol -  low up.  Functional Classification of Oral Appliances   [0:29:42]  We have two basic functional classifications of oral appliances, tongue retaining devices  and mandibular repositioning appliances or mandibular advancement devices. Now this is  what they've been called, also called mandibular repositioning devices. So MRDs, MRAs,  MADs. These are terms that we've used. And I think we should change that. Now, as I  record this, this hasn't happened yet, but I'm in the process of having a group that I work  with create what will, I think, be the first mandibular stabilization appliance. There are  splints, maxillary splints that have been used over the years that have been called stuff like  that.  [0:30:33]  But that doesn't make any sense because if you have something on your maxilla that's not  attached to the lower jaw, it's not having any impact on that lower jaw unless the teeth are  together. So it's not stabilizing nothing, particularly while sleeping. Remember kind of 1%  occlusion stuff, right? How much time the person actually spends with their teeth together  at night. A mandibular stabilization appliance would be a sleep appliance that doesn't pro -  trude the jaw. So the name of what these things have been called over the years implies or  implicit in the name is protrusion of the jaw. And of course, the people who started this  field, that's what it was about, right? Head tilt, chin lift, we're bringing the jaw forward. Log -  ical. However, very often you don't need to bring the jaw forward or you don't need to bring  it forward much. But there's cases where you don't need to bring it forward at all. It's about  keeping the jaw from falling backwards. Okay, so these are the terms that we use now, but  work with me and let's change that. Really, a lot of times it's just about stabilizing the  mandible, not protruding. And all of the problems that people think we're going to have with  TMJ problems and bite changes and all those sorts of things that we don't necessarily  have to have, but still the doctors you work with, dentists in your community, they're going  to be concerned about that. It's all about the protrusion. They're concerned about jacking  the jaw way forward. You don't have to jack the jaw way forward. So I would consider if I  were you helping them understand that a lot of the times in younger, thinner, healthier  09/01/25   Page   of 10   12

SSC 2.0 - 114: Screening Your Patients  people, it's not about jacking the jaw forward. Nevertheless, that's what these things are  called nowadays.  Tongue Retaining Device (TRD)   [0:32:19]  Tongue-retaining devices, these are basically for people who don't have teeth. So indica -  tions for a tongue-retaining device. Typically, you're going to see tongue-retaining devices  used in edentulous people. Well, actually, let's be real here. Typically, you're never going to  see tongue-retaining devices used. That's the reality. We can probably count on five fin -  gers the number that I've fit in my career, and almost all of them were on the bolded one  here, people with Down syndrome. Why we've used tongue-retaining devices on patients  with Down syndrome is because they have macroglossia, big tongues. They tend to be a  little bit retrognathic, but it's the tongue. The tongue is the big thing there, right? And we'd  have to bring the jaw forward a long ways to get their tongue forward that far.  [0:33:06]  So with the tongue-retaining device, you stick your tongue into this bulb and suck the  tongue forward. Now, you could use a tongue-retaining device on anybody, but again, typi -  cally, they're used when oral appliances can't be used. The literature would say that these  are less effective than mandibular advancement devices, but that does not mean that  they're not super effective in some people. So remember, whenever you kind of, well, the  literature says, remember, those are averages, okay? It's going to say, on average, a  tongue-retaining device is not as effective as a mandibular advancement device. Yeah,  okay, I'll buy that, but that doesn't mean you should just throw it out from your toolbox be -  cause it's like, oh, well, the literature says that these don't work. No, the literature says that  they don't work as well as a mandibular advancement device, but that is never by an indi -  vidual patient necessarily that is in general in a study. Remember, we don't treat stats. We  treat people. So if there's one in a hundred that are responders and you're treating that  one person, then they're going to be a responder there. Conversely, if one is a responder,  99 are not, you've got the person that 99 and they're not responders.  [0:34:21]  We're treating individuals is the bottom line. Okay, so that's tongue retaining devices.  Again, we got the little bulb there. Tongue goes into that. That kind of reminds me of my  favorite Christmas movie, A Christmas Story, where the kid put his tongue on the flagpole  there. That's kind of what's going on now. The bummer with tongue retaining devices is  they're not that comfortable. And once again, we almost never use these in our practice.  I'm not even sure who makes these anymore. So there was a laboratory in the St. Louis  area called Knight, K-N-I-G-H-T Knight Laboratories. I looked them up a while back be -  cause someone in Spencer Study Club had a question of where do I have this made?  Couldn't even find them. This one that used to be sold by Glidewell here, again, I put this  in for historical context, not sold by Glidewell anymore. I think you can find this on the in -  09/01/25   Page   of 11   12

SSC 2.0 - 114: Screening Your Patients  ternet still, but bottom line, not really used a lot. Therefore, no pressure for any of these  companies to continue manufacturing the things because no one is really using them.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 12   12

