SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  SSC 2.0   Level 1  115: Custom Appliance Selection  [intro music]  Mandibular Repositioners   [0:00:12]  All right, let's talk now about so-called mandibular repositioners. And before I spend the  next however long going through all of these, there's like 150 plus FDA cleared appliances  for snoring and sleep apnea. Did you know that? Like over 150. And tell you what, why  don't I just cut to the chase and give you the one best appliance? Wouldn't that be nice?  Just let me just tell you the one and then you don't have to fiddle around. You can just take  the rest of the time off here. You don't need to watch the rest of this section here. You don't  need to watch that section in level two that goes through all of the different oral appliances  and how to fit them and all that kind of stuff. Let's just give you the one best appliance and  then that's all we got to worry about, right?  Custom Appliance Selection   [0:00:57]  Well, can you guess what the one best appliance is? I bet you guessed, but you might ac -  tually be wrong. You probably said the one that works. And actually, the one best appliance  is the one the patient will actually use. What's the difference? Well, the difference is if you  say the one that works, then that could be interpreted as the one that reduces their HI to  below 10 or reduces their HI to below five or reduces their HI by at least 50% and their  oxygen desaturation stays above 90. There could be different definitions of working, but  here's the bottom line. The appliance that is still in their retainer case on their nightstand  for sure doesn't work. It all determined... It's all determined by will they use it. That is the  most important thing. And I don't want you to be like Doreen here, who in veterinary school  breezes through chapter nine on equine medicine where every diagnosis has a treatment  of shoot the horse. Now, why do I put in this far side here? Well, one, I think it's funny, but  two is a lot of dentists are shoot the horse dentists. I don't know if you're this way with  everything, but with oral appliance therapy, it's like, yeah, I came across that appliance of  some course, a course that happened to be taught by the people who make that appli -  ance.  [0:02:24]  And for some odd reason, it's the only appliance that they talked about in the entire  course. And that's what I use. And that's all I use. So every patient gets the same appli -  09/01/25   Page   of 1   22

SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  ance or you just have gotten into that habit because that's what you do. You do what you  know. And when you tell your staff, hey, let's get Jim here, a snorer, a snore guard. Let's  get Jim a whatever. Your staff knows that means this specific appliance. So what I really  want to do here is expand your horizons and help you understand how these things work.  And then we're really going to get to the art and science of mandibular appliance or oral  appliance therapy. The science is all mandibular advancement devices do the same thing.  And that is they anchor to the upper jaw. They anchor to the maxilla and they keep the  lower jaw from falling back or bring it forward a little bit.  [0:03:21]  Now, again, I've already discussed here that I don't love the name mandibular advance -  ment devices because we don't always advance the mandible. So note here, and this is  how I talk to my patients, they keep the mandible from falling backwards or bring it forward  a little bit. We don't always have to bring it forward. All anchor to the maxilla. Maxilla is at -  tached to your skull. It's not going anywhere. So the maxilla is our anchorage point. The  mandible can move. And so therefore, our mandibular... Our oral appliance is going to an -  chor to the maxilla, keeps the lower jaw from falling backwards, primarily forward if we  need to. That's the science. The art is you determining what appliance the patient will ac -  tually use. What will they wear? What can they tolerate? And that is the key as we go into  level two of helping somebody is that that first little bit of how you fit the appliance and how  you discuss with them how long it's going to take them to get used to it. And maybe even  having them wear half of the appliance for a while to get used to it.  [0:04:35]  And doing whatever you can to get them to the point of sleeping through the night suc -  cessfully with the appliance. It does not matter if it protects their airway if they can't sleep  with it in. We got to get to sleep with it in first. And then we start tweaking it to focus on HI  and sleep efficiency and sleep architecture and all that stuff. If we can't get past the first  step though, we're never getting to the real reason that that person has come in, which is  no one also, by the way, comes to you for an oral appliance. They come to you for an out -  come. No one's ever woken up one day and like, man, if only I could stuff my mouth with  plastic when I sleep at night, I bet that would just really be the ticket. No, people are think -  ing, man, if I could not snore, then maybe my wife wouldn't divorce me. Man, if I could get  a better night's sleep, maybe I wouldn't fall asleep at the wheel. Boy, if I could get a better  night's sleep, maybe I wouldn't fall asleep in meetings in the afternoon and risk getting  fired from my job.  [0:05:37]  That's what they're coming to you for, is an outcome, not a piece of plastic. On our types of  oral appliances, we have five mechanisms of action. All anchor to the maxilla, keep the  lower jaw from falling backwards or bring it forward a little away, but there's five different  ways that this is done, and really only five. Now, all appliances that you ever see are going  to fall into one of these five mechanisms of action. So you can go to an Academy of Dental  Sleep Medicine meeting or some other dental sleep medicine-related meeting, and there's  going to be laboratories there, there's going to be manufacturers there, and you can kind  09/01/25   Page   of 2   22

SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  of go and look at the appliances they have on display there. Let's say that Great Lakes Or -  thodontics was there, for example. They make a bajillion different appliances, and you  could look at their table and be like, okay, that's a push, that's a pull, that's an anterior pull-  push, that's an interlocking, and then you would know that, and then you're like, all right,  what makes that interlocking appliance special? What are kind of the features and benefits  of that particular style of interlocking appliance?  [0:06:44]  And that's helpful because then you can kind of get these different categories down, and  what I really want you to do is experience many of these, if you can, for yourself, and then  you're going to know better what is your patient likely to tolerate, because you will have  had personal experience with these appliances, at least with the appliance types, and then  you can, again, narrow down when you're talking to the patient and getting some informa -  tion from them on what are they more likely to actually use. So we got our anterior pull-  push, these are appliances like the TAP Silencer, MDSA, things like that. Push are Herbst  appliances, now none are actually called the Herbst appliance, but they're all the ones with  the bars. Pull, EMA, Silent Night, etcetera. Interlocking, Dorsals, Respire, etcetera. Ad -  justable Monoblock, Moses, PM Positioner, Klearway, etcetera. Those are our adjustable  monoblocks. Now, frankly, to kind of jump right to the take here, you're going to use the top  four. The adjustable monoblocks we almost never use. It's interesting, I had a colleague of  mine that is mostly a TMD guy and does a little bit of sleep, and he was using this ad -  justable monoblock here, kind of pictured at the bottom here.  [0:07:59]  And the bummer with monoblocks is you can't move your jaw in any direction. And he was  talking about this patient having some problems, and I was like, well, if I were you, I would  give the patient an appliance that gives them a little bit more freedom of motion of their  jaw. Now, lots of people do fine with something like that, but you're just taking a bit of a risk  that I don't think you need to in today's age. So you're going to kind of jump into appli -  ances that are more comfortable, because once again, most important thing is the patient  actually uses that appliance.  Appliance Selection (Things to Consider)   [0:08:30]  Okay, so here are different things to consider. And I'm going to go through this item by  item. So this might take a bit, but we're going to kind of discuss why I have all of these bul -  let points on here and what you need to do to consider or what you need to consider when  you are choosing the appliance. Okay, first is lateral bruxism or evidence of being a lateral  bruxer. So what we'd be looking for here, of course, is someone with lateral wear. So  they've got their canines worn down, cusp tips worn down a little bit, and it looks like this is  a person who grinds side to side and at least has historically, we don't know if they are cur -  rently or not, but we're going to hope for the best, which is that they are not grinding or that  09/01/25   Page   of 3   22

SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  they will stop grinding if we protect their airway. And we're going to prepare for the worst,  which is that they are not going to stop grinding and that they are currently grinding. So  with a lateral bruxer, obviously, we want to have them within an appliance that allows lat -  eral motion.  [0:09:37]  So as we go through all these appliances, we'll kind of go through this checklist, not all of  them, but that's one that I'm going to bring up every time is, would this be a good choice in  someone who has evidence of lateral bruxism? All right, the next two are desire to keep  your mouth closed while sleeping or the ability to open your mouth. And I've made this  mistake before. I remember having a patient that's kind of like, yeah, I sleep with my  mouth open. And so in my mind, I was thinking, oh, I need to give them an appliance that  keeps the mouth shut. So I use like a TAP style appliance we'll talk about in a minute that  keeps the mouth shut pretty well. And they came back and they said, I can't wear this. And  I'm like, well, why can't you wear it? And they said, because I sleep with my mouth open.  And I'm like, oh, you mean you want to sleep with your mouth open? Now, again, we're not  going to debate right now the pros and cons of sleeping with your mouth open. I will agree  with you that that's not ideal, but it doesn't matter if it's ideal or not if the patient won't try  therapy because they feel that they need to have the ability to open their mouth.  [0:10:35]  So I had to remake that patient's appliance into one that they could open their mouth  freely, like a pull-style appliance, like an EMA or something like that. And then there was  someone else that's like, yeah, I sleep with my mouth open, and I'm like, okay, yep, and I  gave them an appliance like an EMA that allowed them to open their mouth or like a Herb -  st that would open their mouth, a push appliance. And they came back and they're like,  well, this doesn't work. Why doesn't it work? Well, because I can open my mouth. I need  something to keep my mouth shut. Oh, you need something to keep your mouth shut. So  then I made them a TAP. Okay, so you get it? So what the point here is, is you need to  clarify with the patient, what do they really want? If they say, yeah, I sleep with my mouth  open. Okay, so we could make you an appliance that would help you keep your mouth  shut. Is that going to make you anxious though or claustrophobic or something like that?  Or what do you think? Oh, no, that'd be great. If I had something that kept my mouth shut,  I think that'd be great.  [0:11:28]  Or they may say, oh, I don't think I could tolerate that. If I can't open my mouth, that's going  to freak me out. Okay, so that's the next two. Next, retention issues. Too little, too much.  So if you have too little retention, and this is another one that I'm going to kind of go over  with each of these selections is lateral bruxer and retention issues. Okay, those are going  to be kind of my big ones that I'll come up with because those are the biggest mistakes I  see dentists make is they don't take those things into account. So too little retention is go -  ing to be tough with any type of pull appliance because it's just going to pop off their teeth  or the anterior pull-push because it's just going to pop off their teeth. Too much retention is  usually not that big a deal. You can just adjust the appliance accordingly. Don't have it so  09/01/25   Page   of 4   22

SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  much over the height of the contour. There's things that you can do. Too little retention is a  much, much, much bigger problem than too much retention. Too much retention we can  usually handle and they can work with pretty much any appliance.  [0:12:34]  Too little retention, you're going to have to make some decisions there on certain appli -  ances. Missing teeth. If they are missing lower posterior teeth, for example, we're not go -  ing to be able to use a pull appliance because there'd be nothing for it to grab onto.  Restorations and future restorative. On this one, it's more the materials that you are think -  ing about working with. So there are some appliances that have a soft liner. That's kind of  nice because you can actually rip out the soft liner and then reline it if you wanted to. You  could choose maybe a printed appliance in this case, especially one that maybe you're  printing in-house. That would keep the cost down. Then when you have to make a new  appliance, then it wouldn't cost you as much as it would for a full lab bill. There are appli -  ances that can be relined easier than others. So that's something to keep in mind. Or you  might choose an appliance that's maybe a little less expensive for the temporary period of  time that you're working through this. You know that you're going to end up kind of grinding  on it and adding to it and stuff like that.  [0:13:41]  And then maybe you're going to do the ultimate appliance after all their restorative is done.  So you just kind of got to think all that stuff through. Distance the patient has to travel. That  one may not have made it to your list. But why this is important is there are some appli -  ances that require a little bit more work from your office and more connection with your of -  fice. For example, pull appliances, having the bands and giving people the bands on a  regular basis and things like that, that might be problematic. Or if you have an appliance  that's very, very thin, making it maybe a little bit more prone to breaking, but that's impor -  tant because you want the patient to have the thinnest appliance possible. But on the oth -  er hand, they drive six hours to get to you or they fly in from another state. That may not  be my choice in that case. I would tend to go with an appliance that is a little less likely to  break. Again, we know that some people clench and grind their teeth to try to protect their  airways so they don't die. So we know that just being a thicker appliance isn't going to stop  them from doing that behavior.  [0:14:49]  It's just going to make it less likely for the appliance to break. And I would also have an  appliance that the patient could adjust and I could instruct them on how to adjust that. For  years, our practice, my partners, Dr. Kuehne and Dr. Stuckey in our Boise practice went up  to Alaska once a month. And up there, we pretty much used interlocking style appliances  that we were able to give the patient the ability to adjust their own appliance, things like  that. We didn't have a lot of follow-up. Now, there was exceptions to that, and there's some  people that we needed to use a Herbst because of their lateral bruxism, stuff like that. But  we made different choices than if they would have been in town in Boise. Next, ability to  return for follow-up. That's kind of the same thing as the distance the patient has to travel.  If it's going to be really, really, really hard for them to come in for follow-up, then that's an -  09/01/25   Page   of 5   22

SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  other one that you kind of got to think that through. And what appliance is less likely for us  to need a lot of adjustments and that's going to be pretty much easy for them to adjust the  AP position of that appliance.  [0:15:54]  Manual dexterity and vision. That is a big deal if you want your patient to be able to adjust  their own appliance position. And in my opinion, you do. I know there's some dentists like,  oh no, I have my patients do all the adjustments themselves. That's great. And that's be -  cause you don't see very many people. Hopefully, you get to the point, if you want to any -  way, you get to the point where you're treating a bunch of people. And if you're treating a  bunch of people, it's going to be pretty tough to get all of those people in every time they  need a screw turned. So it's nice to have the ability of the patient to change it. Now, unfor -  tunately, I'll talk about in a minute, Medicare only covers certain appliances. So that's a bit  of a bummer for us because the actually easiest ones for someone with poor manual dex -  terity or vision to use would be the pull appliances, would be the easiest. And they don't  cover those. Except for one exception to that. Metal allergies and sensitivity. So this is an -  other big one. If you have a patient that says, I can't tolerate metal in my mouth, please do  not try to convince them that yes, they can.  [0:17:07]  Please do not try to convince them that, well, you're not actually allergic to titanium. I'm  sure you're not allergic to stainless steel or whatever. Been there, done that. I fought all  those battles. I lost them all. So we don't do it anymore. So if a patient's like, yeah, I can't  really tolerate metal on my skin, on my mouth. I can't wear cheap earrings, stuff like that.  Don't go down that road. So, okay, all right. Well, and there may be some cases where  you're like, well, in that case, Medicare really only covers these ones with these metal in it.  So we're going to have to go outside of Medicare. Hope you're okay with that. And usually  they'll say, yeah, I am okay with that because I know I'm not going to tolerate that if it has  metal in it. Prior experience with oral appliance therapy. Another huge one here. If you've  got a patient that comes in and they've been wearing a whatever appliance for five or 10  years, maybe they're on their second one, third one, whatever. Make them that. Do not be  like, oh, you know what? I bet you would like this better.  [0:18:07]  No, they're not. They're going to like what they're used to. And so there's a handful of ap -  pliances that I've done like one or two in my whole career. And what those were, were  those were redoing ones the patients had. Like they came in with a clear way, for example,  and we never do the clear way appliance. And I was like, well, make another clear way. So  I had to figure out how do I get a clear way and what lab makes it and all that kind of stuff.  If a patient has been really doing well with a certain appliance, I'm going to make them ex -  actly that appliance as close to exactly the way their old appliance was as I can. I made  this mistake, too, in the past when we started doing less and less TAP appliances and  more like EMA type of appliances. I found that most patients tolerated the EMA better.  They found it more comfortable, things like that. So I kind of talked my patients into moving  to the EMA if they'd been doing well with the TAP. And you know what I did? Ended up  09/01/25   Page   of 6   22

SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  making a lot of TAPs. So I would give them the EMA. They wouldn't like it for whatever  reason. And then I would give them a TAP because they knew what they liked.  [0:19:12]  Okay, so don't argue with them. Just like, hey, there are other options and stuff here.  You're doing well with this. I would probably suggest that we stick with this. What do you  think? And so there are exceptions to that. So the exception to that rule, and it's not really  an exception. It's just a different side of that coin. I had a patient once who received a  Herbst appliance from another dentist, and she hated the appliance. But really, in talking to  the patient more, she didn't like the dentist. Had nothing to do with the appliance. She  didn't just like the dentist. So when I was telling her about different appliances, she basi -  cally rejected the idea of using that same... It was Herbst style appliance, that same Herbst  appliance. She wanted something completely different. It was really kind of unique psycho -  logical thing that I saw there that I hadn't seen in other people, where she just associated...  She didn't want to, like, not like that other dentist, I think. So she just put all of that disgust  and disappointment in that practitioner into the appliance.  [0:20:27]  So we made her another appliance, and she had Medicare and stuff. It wouldn't matter  anyway because the other dentist had already billed her out on Medicare. That was part of  the upset that this patient had. So they weren't going to cover another appliance anyway,  but we moved to something completely different from that Herbst appliance, and the pa -  tient loved it. Well, actually, she just liked us. She liked interacting with us. So same thing if  they've had a bad experience with an appliance. Clearly, you wouldn't make that same ap -  pliance. If they've had a great experience with an appliance, clearly, you would make that  appliance. And then last is current or history of TMJ problems. This one kind of goes to the  top of the list here too of the lateral bruxer. Those are kind of connected. So if somebody  has evidence of a TMJ problem or history of a TMJ problem, just make sure that you're  giving them an appliance that allows them to move, that's not going to be so rigid, that if  there are any weird things that they're doing at night that are unpredictable, the appliance  is going to break instead of they are going to break.  [0:21:39]  Okay, so I'm going to have a chart here at the end that will go through all of these to go  through this, but that's kind of an overview of why I came up with all these different bullet  points. And every single one of the bullet points on this slide here are from personal expe -  rience. Okay, so if you haven't had those experiences yet, you will or just again learn from  my mistakes and then you don't have to make those mistakes.  Anterior Pull-Push   [0:22:05]  All right, our first category, our mechanism of action is the anterior pull-push. Now pull-  push is a weird way to say it maybe because, pulling and pushing are different things, but  09/01/25   Page   of 7   22

SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  what it is, is we are pulling the jaw up until they are edge to edge. So we're pulling the  mandible forward till we're edge to edge. Once they're past edge to edge, then it's push -  ing. Okay, so here's our maxilla mandible pull push. Why I use that term, there's other  terms, the ADSM has some different terms that they've developed over the years. I think I  was one of the first people to come up with these mechanism of action things and then  they've, some people have called it like tension and traction and stuff like that. So I use  very simple terms to make it kind of clear. Why this one matters that it's pull push is after  you're past edge to edge, the forces on the teeth are different. Okay, so the pushing force  and the pulling force are going to be different forces. And with really all the appliances I'm  going to talk about, if you make even a relatively minor adjustment, a millimeter adjust -  ment, expect that the patient and tell the patient that this is going to feel different on their  teeth, that the forces on their teeth are going to be different, that all these force vectors  that are allowing that jaw to be held forward or keeping it from falling backwards will be dif -  ferent by just changing that angle of that pushing, pulling, whatever the appliance is doing  to accomplish that. If you adjust it a little bit, if you kind of think in your head of these force  vectors, they all change with just a little minor change. Okay, so that's our anterior pull-  push. Now three of the appliances on the screen here are all TAP appliances.  [0:23:54]  So TAP is the main player in the anterior pull-push category. They've been around for  decades and decades, lots of history with the TAP appliance, a great appliance. One of the  big advantages of the TAP appliance is that it can really bring the jaw forward. So if you  have somebody that really needs a lot of protrusion, this is a great choice. The anterior  pull-push appliances have good lateral motion, so that is fine. This appliance here, am I  pointing on the screen, called the DreamTap. So the nice thing with the DreamTap, as  you'll see in a few minutes here, it's super similar to the MyTap. And if you like to use the  MyTap as a temporary device, then this could be a great long-term appliance because this  is custom made, but it looks just like the MyTap. So if somebody has done the MyTap and  they're like, yeah, this is great and my wife's happy and everybody's doing great, it might  be wise to move them to a long-term appliance that is basically exactly the same as the  MyTap. It's going to be slightly thicker, but it's going to be pretty much the same, versus  taking them from a MyTap to something else.  [0:25:07]  They may like the MyTap better. So that's kind of a risk with our temporary appliances is if  they like that better. Now, different types and styles of this. Here's some of the things to  consider with this. Some designs allow the appliance to be adjusted while being worn. So  the nice thing with an anterior pull push too is you can put in that mechanisms, in this case  in this appliance, the TAP3 or the DreamTap. The DreamTap just has a, or excuse me, the  FlexTap. I think I called that the DreamTap. Here, let me back up. So this appliance here,  that's called the FlexTap, the FlexTap. This is the DreamTap down here. So the DreamTap  and the TAP3 have a Allen wrench that goes in the front there and that's how it adjusts the  position. The FlexTap just has our volume control knob, I like to call it, there in the front  and you turn that and that is how you adjust the mechanism. So again, some designs of  09/01/25   Page   of 8   22

SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  anterior pull push allow this. All the TAP appliances can be adjusted while it's still in the  mouth.  [0:26:14]  Quick comment on that. If you ever have a patient that has had bilateral joint replacement,  unfortunately, but they had that done to them, then you need to use a TAP appliance. And  why that is, is because you can adjust it while it's in their mouth and you put this in, they  will not be able to protrude their jaw on their own because they don't have lateral ptery -  goids attached to condyles anymore as they have fake condyles. We just had a business  elite event recently and one of the team members that came with the doctor has bilateral  joint replacement and I was like, just curious, can you do this and this? And she's like, well,  I can move side to side a little and you could tell it was her medial pterygoid allowing her to  do that and it's about one millimeter each way. So I decide about one millimeter, but she  couldn't protrude at all. That's a bummer, right? Because that means that people that have  had bilateral joint replacement can't protect their own airways anymore. So the rest of us  can protrude our jaw. That's why people come out on their front teeth, right? They can't,  which sucks.  [0:27:20]  So if you have one of these patients, then you need to use this appliance. They will stick it  on their teeth, close into it, and then they'll take the Allen wrench and bring their jaw for -  ward to whatever position we need to use. And then in the morning, they can just actually  just open. Those muscles work fine. And then they just take it out and they'd have to back  it up. Okay. Some designs have mechanisms to alter the vertical. Usually you're just doing  something with acrylic or you can get different sizes of hooks and stuff. This does a good  job of keeping the mouth closed. Although one could argue that with having the mecha -  nism in front, that might be harder to get your lips around or by having something sticking  out of your mouth, then obviously that might be a little bit harder for some people. Some  designs have reasonable lateral motion. So most of them you can move side to side pretty  good. Some designs allow forward protrusion like a lot. So meaning that you can... What  this means is not adjusting it forward, but that you can bring your jaw forward.  [0:28:20]  Some don't though. So some TAP appliances are kind of locked in by design that the pa -  tient can't move. They can move side to side, but they can't move backwards or forwards. I  prefer an appliance that allows the patient to move further forward if they want to. Because  when we just are getting started, we may not have them in exactly the right spot. So I like  them to have the ability to move their jaw forward again if they need to. Not ideal in deep  overbite cases. Do they need to have at least five millimeters of anterior vertical space for  the hook mechanism? So what we're talking about here is if we've got a deep overbite and  then we need to open them to have all that mechanism in the front, you can open them up  really wide. Whereas some appliances you could have them pretty close to edge to edge  and then you wouldn't have had to have opened them quite as wide. If they have deep  overbite you still open them, but you didn't have to open them a bunch more. Okay so not  09/01/25   Page   of 9   22

SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  my favorite choice in people with a deep overbite. That does have to do though with can  they close their lips around it.  [0:29:27]  That's the main thing. If it's open really wide then the problem isn't necessarily a vertical  type of thing in my opinion. It's more about can they close their lips. If your patient can't  close their lips around the appliance, in my experience that's almost always a deal break -  er. There are some mouth breathers that that won't bother them because that's what they  do, but people that are not mouth breathers that's a big problem. And tape's not going to  help, stuff like that's not going to help. If they can't close their lips around the appliance  then in my experience that's going to be a major problem. Now all of these appliances are  going to have a concentration of forces somewhere on the appliance and this style of ap -  pliance the forces are on the upper front teeth. So this will put pressure there more so than  on other teeth. Your single rooted teeth don't like pressure on them. So your upper and  lower front teeth don't like it and this one is kind of anchoring there. Now granted you could  take the material off and it would still have anchorage on the back teeth but by design it's  mostly there on the front teeth.  [0:30:41]  So just be aware of that, just be careful if you have patients that have periodontally com -  promised front teeth. I had a patient once who ultimately lost eight and nine and as I  looked back on her case afterwards she didn't blame me or the oral appliance therapy and  either did her dentist but she ultimately lost eight and nine we had to make her new appli -  ance and I went back and kind of looked at her pano on her original records and stuff and  saw you know what yeah she had some bone loss there that that probably wasn't the best  choice of appliance. After she got her new teeth I made an appliance where I didn't even  touch her front teeth. Okay, so keep that in mind with this as well. Also make sure the lab  uses your bite registration. This is usually going to be the case that they will but with the  anterior pull-push appliances sometimes if they don't use your bite registration the appli -  ance will hit on the second molars and you won't even be able to hook it in and that's a  bad day of course. So if you can give them the bite registration give them enough opening  that shouldn't be a problem. If you can't hook it in it's usually because it's bonking on the  second molars.  Bilateral Push Appliances   [0:31:50]  Okay, All right moving on so now let's talk about our bilateral push appliances. So the push  appliances also referred to generically as Herbst appliances. None of these are actually  called the Herbst appliance but we call them all Herbst appliances because of the Herbst  bars. These will kind of concentrate forces back in the molar area. Molars don't mind pres -  sure as much so that doesn't tend to be as big of a problem. You can move your jaw side  to side well with this appliance and retention is not much of an issue at all because there's  09/01/25   Page   of 10   22

SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  very little resistance to opening. Now you notice that all of these pictures here either have  rubber bands on them, places for rubber bands They've got ball class for rubber bands,  things like that. Why that is, is because a lot of people with a steeper mandibular angle like  I have, the jaw will just kind of open and it will fall back. So if you don't have a real square  jaw, just kind of the mechanism here could allow your jaw to fall back a little bit and then it  wouldn't be as effective.  [0:32:53]  So a lot of people will need to use elastics. I do. So if I wear this appliance, I need to use  elastics. I'm not someone who spends time with my teeth together. And because of that,  my jaw will fall back a little bit and that protrusion won't be as much. I didn't mention this  before, but the TAP appliances, almost all of them, actually all of them, are covered by  Medicare. They're PDAC approved. So Medicare and then other insurance companies that  follow Medicare and virtually all of the Herbst style appliances are also Medicare ap -  proved. This one in, the biggest one here in the center of the screen is my favorite. This is  the Herbst or the it's called the Silent Night with the Glidewell hinge. So this is the push  appliance from Glidewell. The reason I like it is if you have to use a Herbst, so I don't like  the Herbst in general because I don't like that you have to put it all in at one time. The pa -  tient has to put it all in at one time as a sandwich instead of individual pieces. Now, you  know, lots of your appliances are going to put in just in one piece, but when you're initially  adjusting the appliance, that makes it a little bit harder on you and a little bit harder for  them to kind of get used to even the feeling of it.  [0:34:08]  Normally we're going to do the upper and we're going to take that out and do the lower and  take that out. We're going to kind of get them together and stuff like that. This one you got  to go straight to all together unless you were to take the bars off, which would be a major  hassle and you're going to drop these little screws and stuff in your carpet and never see  them again. So most people don't do that. The advantage of the Glidewell one is that it's  that soft hard material that you're probably familiar with if you've ever done a comfort night  guard from Glidewell. It's the exact same material. As a matter of fact, you could even  have them do it in those colors if you wanted to, but it's that soft hard material, so very  easy to fit, very comfortable for the patient. Disadvantage is it discolors quicker, right? And  so that you got to warn the patient that that's going to happen, but I don't know that that's  necessarily a problem. You tell the patient, hey, over time this is going to start to get kind of  yucky and when it does, that's going to be the time to replace it.  [0:35:02]  So I don't know that I would just rule that out because of that. Maybe that's a good thing  that they have an indicator of like, all right, this is getting old, I need this replaced. But that  is a feature of it being that comfort liner, but it also could be a flaw in your mind if you want  this to look really good for as long as possible. The other nice thing about that comfort liner  is you can rip it out. Now you may have never done this before, but how you do it is you  take an explorer and you can get a little purchase between the soft and the hard, and as  soon as you've got a little bit of separation there, take some acrylic monomer, drip that  09/01/25   Page   of 11   22

SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  monomer into that separation, and that will break the bond of the soft to the hard, and  you'll just rip it out, and you'll basically have a bleaching tray in your hand. Why you would  do that is if you had the person was getting a new crown or crowns or bridge or something  like that, and you needed to reline that, you didn't want to start over.  [0:36:06]  Maybe their insurance won't pay for a new appliance for a couple more years. You need to  do some stuff here. Well, you can rip out. Don't try to grind it out. Grinding it out will take  you a day. You just kind of rip it out, and then you could flow in thermoplastic if you wanted  to, or acrylic, whatever, in order to reline that. So that's kind of a nice benefit of that appli -  ance, too, is you can do that. Hard appliances, of course, you just grind them out and then  add some acrylic. I also really, really, really, really like the mechanism on this appliance. So  these tubes that you see here, what they call the Glidewell hinge, an Allen wrench goes in  that, and then there's a little nut in there, and you turn the Allen wrench clockwise, so  righty-tighty, and that pushes that nut backwards in order to bring the jaw forwards. And it's  both sides the same, which is cool. So if they turn righty-tighty on the right mechanism and  righty-tighty on the left mechanism, that brings their jaw forward. It also has these little  hash marks. You kind of see back in here little hash marks.  [0:37:07]  You can see them down here, too, on the Oasis, the Oasis Herbst. And what those are is  to keep track of where you are. So rather than a more traditional bar like these up here or  this one down here, they separate and you can measure kind of the forward protrusion  with a caliper. But typically how we did this was we would have to count turns. So the staff,  when the patient comes in, they bring in the appliance, and the first thing the staff member  would do is like basically turn it backwards to the starting point. One, two, three, four, five,  six, seven, eight, nine, . 10And they'd figure out, okay, yep, 10 turns. And then they would  do the other side and they would figure out if the patient had asymmetrically adjusted the  appliance or what was going on. Now with this one by Glidewell, Glidewell also makes this  one too, which is the Oasis version of it. Very, very similar appliances except this one is  the hard soft. This one is just all hard. But you've got those hash marks there so you don't  have to do that anymore.  [0:38:10]  You would just simply look and you'd be able to see immediately where is it and is it the  same on both sides, stuff like that. So overall, the Herbst is a fine appliance. I don't love it  because of the initial difficulty adjusting it and then also the metal, okay? This is kind of the  scariest looking appliance we have. Not scary to you because you're a dentist and you've  seen these things before. Kind of scary looking for patients though, right? Kind of looks  like a bear trap and sometimes we'll refer to it as a bear trap, especially if we are encour -  aging them to not get the bear trap. But the metal is going to be a deal breaker for a lot of  your patients. Okay, going through this allows good lateral motion, absolutely, allows ante -  rior protrusion so the patient can push their jaw forward on their own. Okay, hopefully that  makes sense so that that screw is keeping their jaw from falling backwards with the arms,  09/01/25   Page   of 12   22

SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  but they can extend their jaw farther forward if they want to. Easy to add vertical to this ap -  pliance.  [0:39:13]  You can add some acrylic on there on the bottom, grease up the top and change that ver -  tical to whatever you want it to be. Maybe difficult for people with poor manual dexterity to  use. The Glidewell version is not so bad because it's an Allen wrench. It's a real obvious  connection there. The ones with the normal bars where it's like down on one side and up  on the other side, that's easy to forget. Putting the tool in, the wrench into the little adjust -  ment mechanism is very difficult. So I would avoid those style of Herbst appliances if you  can, if you're using it with someone older. May cause discomfort in the lower anterior teeth  due to the forces being concentrated there. So I mentioned it's going to kind of push from  the molars and then these lower teeth are going to have a lot of that force. Now if they are  complaining of that, you can just take off a little bit on the lingual side and it won't hurt as  much or at all. Have the lab place posterior stops if they don't automatically do that and  use your bite registration so they have it prescribed the initial vertical. So I like this to have  posterior stops because otherwise the way it's made is it hits all the way around.  [0:40:24]  And while that's fine for reducing the vertical, it makes it really tough to adjust it because if  you want to lower the vertical, you got a lot of plastic to remove there. So I like to have  kind of like we're going to see on the pull appliances, little bite stops in the back and then  it's much easier to adjust that side to side and adjust your vertical. And lastly, may need to  use the elastics like I discussed if they have kind of a steeper mandibular angle. Just plan  on using the elastics for everyone and then after a while you can say, hey, you can try to  go without the elastics and see if it makes any difference. I mean, it's no big deal for them  to wear the elastics. If they don't have to, then great, just a little bit easier to deal with, I  guess. But I would always expect to use the elastics on this appliance. Make sure you  never have a Herbst style appliance that doesn't have the ability to use elastics. That'll bite  you. So have the ability, use it at the first, and then after a while you could ask the patient,  hey, you ever go without the elastics or you could try going without the elastics. That might  give you a little bit more freedom in your jaw. You might find it a little bit more comfortable,  but let's make sure that your snoring is also good and that you're feeling better.  Bilateral Pull Appliances   [0:41:31]  All right, let's move on now to the pull appliances. So pull appliances anchor up in the ca -  nine first premolar area and pull the jaw forward or keep it from falling back with that pull  type of mechanism. Some brand names here. So this is the Silent Night by Glidewell,  probably the number one made custom appliance in the world. And as I joke at Glidewell  when I talk about this appliance, made exclusively by dentists who have no idea what  they're doing. And I'll always have people in the crowd are going like, yeah, that's exactly  09/01/25   Page   of 13   22

SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  right. That's why I'm here to take your course, Jamison. But there's nothing wrong with the  Silent Night. The Silent Night is a thin appliance. It's comfortable. It's super duper light.  The only bummer that I have with it is these bands on here are a hassle to use. The but -  tons themselves go through the material, but they have a tendency to kind of fall out.  [0:42:33]  They don't break off. They just fall out and the bands are hard to use for anybody. So I  don't suggest that you use that. However, by a miracle from someone who used to work  with Glidewell, that appliance, as of recording this in 2025, that appliance is on the  Medicare PDAC list. Hopefully sometime down the road, we won't have to deal with this  Medicare PDAC bullcrap anymore because it's ridiculous that this is not based on any sci -  ence. It's not based on anything else. We need to get rid of it. Back in the olden days, we  could use any appliance that we wanted to. But right now, this appliance is on that list,  which means you can use this for your Medicare patients. So that's pretty cool. None of  the other pull appliances are, well, actually, you know what? I take that back. I think this  one here, too, also is on that list. This is the Panthera, and I think it also got on the  Medicare list. So this pull appliance and this pull appliance, the big difference here is this  pull appliance is like 150 bucks or something like that, and this one's like 700 bucks.  [0:43:46]  The Panthera, of course, is nylon, indestructible. The Glidewell Silent Night is definitely not  indestructible, but massive difference there in the cost. Upper right-hand corner is our  EMA. And then down here is the Silent Night 3D. Now, I really like this appliance. So  again, I don't love the original Silent Night, but the Silent Night 3D is awesome. It's 3D  printed and the bands, as you notice, the bands are dramatically different. So these bands  are really nice. So it allows the patient to move their jaw forward if they want to. It slides  and they're really easy to change. You just kind of rotate. You can kind of see these but -  tons are elongated. So you just rotate and then you can easily take that band off. The nice  thing about those bands is they are super rigid. They're basically not going to stretch. If  they did stretch, it would be super minor over time. Whereas the EMA bands are flexible,  are elastic. So elastic mandibular advancement is what EMA stands for. And they will  stretch out. So is that a feature or a flaw? So that depends, right? So I really, really, really  like using the EMA appliance because of the stretchy out nature of the bands.  [0:45:05]  And this will be my go-to appliance in patients that have a TMJ problem or a history of a  TMJ problem. And also, I like the idea that with the pull appliance here, and I haven't men -  tioned this, so I apologize. On the anterior pull-push appliance and the push appliance,  who can adjust that appliance? Who can adjust the anterior pull-push or the push, the  Herbst style appliances? And you may say, well, you know, whoever has the screwdriver  or the Allen wrench or the key. True. But with the example of the Allen wrench, for exam -  ple, do you think maybe they have an Allen wrench at home, even if you don't give them  the magic Allen wrench? On the example of the key, that's kind of like a paperclip. Do you  think they might have a paperclip at home, even if you don't give them the magic paper -  clip? So here's the point of that is your patients can adjust the appliances by themselves,  09/01/25   Page   of 14   22

SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  even if you don't give them whatever tool it is to do it, because the tool is a basic tool, ex -  cept for the pull appliances. So the pull appliances, you're in charge, because they can  only go as far forward as the band that you give them to go forward with. And they can't  get the bands on Amazon, usually.  [0:46:29]  And even if they could, then, clearly that would be on them. We'd be able to show that,  well, you're treating yourself. I'm not involved anymore. But the cool thing about a pull ap -  pliance is if your patient is lost to follow-up, their jaw will never go 10 miles forward. So  quick story on that. I had a patient once with a TAP appliance, and he was fit in Texas and  moved to the Boise area. He was an executive for Albertsons. And his dentist had told him  to turn the mechanism like two or three turns a week. And I'm sure the dentist said, or at  least I hope they did, until your snoring has stopped and you're feeling better. And he,  smart guy, didn't hear that part, though, and he just thought he was supposed to turn that  two or three turns every week forever. So he did. And a TAP appliance can usually come  forward 12 to 14 millimeters, depending on where they start, right? And this guy jacked his  jaw all the way forward. He was full-on class three. And I remember him coming in and be -  ing like, yeah, I'm just not sure, but everyone at work just always thinks I look angry.  [0:47:44]  Well, maybe it could have to do with that bulldog bite you got there. And we took a cone  beam CT. I expected his condyle to be clear out to here. It was right here. So I must as -  sume that it was back in his ear hole somewhere before treatment. And now he was for -  ward and things had adapted. And this was his jaw. This was his bite. So he ended up hav -  ing Le Fort osteotomy, had to bring his maxilla forward in order to match his mandible. And  he was happy in the end of it. But the moral of that story is that couldn't have happened  with a pull appliance. You're never going to have a patient come back way out here with a  pull appliance because you didn't give them the band to go way out there. And if they are  lost to follow up, they ultimately have to come back to you to get more bands. So that's a  massive advantage of the pull style appliances. The disadvantage of these appliances is  you got to have good retention in order to use this. And particularly, you need good reten -  tion in the lower molar area. So if they are missing lower posterior teeth on any of these  appliances, the Panthera design is going to be maybe not as bad.  [0:49:03]  This one also with those wings that come up makes it a little bit harder for the patient to  move side to side. All the rest of these can move laterally just fine. This one, it's not bad,  but that does restrict motion a little bit. But also because of that wing coming up, it's going  to make it so it's less dependent on retention on the lower posterior teeth. The rest of  them, lower posterior teeth got to be there with good retention, or it's just going to pop off.  So this is one of the reasons. So you'll hear me talk about the EMA. I like the EMA. We  use a nylon EMA, kind of like the Panthera there, except the EMA version. We're now  printing, as I record this here, this is just starting, but we're printing appliances in-house.  By the time you're watching this, hopefully this is kind of standard fare that people are  printing appliances and there's many more appliances that we're able to print. So I really,  09/01/25   Page   of 15   22

SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  really like it, but there's cases of, again, missing posterior teeth, stuff like that, where we  can't use it. All right, just kind of going through some of these here.  [0:50:00]  Good lateral motion, allows anterior protrusion so the patient can move their jaw forward,  okay, with themselves, easy to add or reduce vertical, so the EMA itself has little pads, that  makes it really easy to adjust that vertical, most of the other appliances you can add  acrylic or whatever, or if you're printing the appliance you can just change it of course, may  cause discomfort in the upper anterior teeth due to forces being concentrated there, so  we're going to anchor here, that's going to go across the front teeth and kind of pull on  those front teeth, however, it's not critical that you have contact on those front teeth, so  you can carve out a window in the front teeth if you wanted to, so the pull style appliance  and specifically the EMA style appliance is my go-to for anyone that has a history of a TMJ  problem, if they have implants that they're freaked out about potentially having hurt, if they  have anterior veneers that they're freaked out about having potentially popped off, the nice  thing with the EMA is I tell the patient, hey these bands on here, this is like crumple zones  in a Mercedes or a BMW  [0:51:09]  If a Mercedes or BMW are in a car accident, the car is destroyed and the driver is still  alive, this appliance, if you're doing any kind of grinding, clenching of the teeth, stuff like  that that we can't necessarily predict if you're going to do or not do while you sleep, these  bands will stretch, they might even break and you'll be okay, okay, so that's a major advan -  tage of this appliance for any of those scenarios that I just gave. Have the lab place poste -  rior stops, so I like the posterior stops, they don't automatically do that on the Silent Night  3D, but I believe you can ask them to do that, and it just makes it easier to adjust. Again, if  it's a full surface on a full surface touching and then you have to change the vertical in any  direction, it's harder than if you've just got a couple stops there to adjust. The bands have  to be replaced, altered position, bands wear out and break. Again, feature or flaw. So if the  person's three states away, maybe that's a flaw. We don't want to be shipping them stuff all  the time. We want them to be able to adjust this themselves and stuff like that.  On the other hand, if they're in my town, not a flaw at all. I would say that's a feature be -  cause it means that they need to keep in touch with us in order to get new bands. They're  not to get lost to follow up.  Interlocking Appliances   [0:52:25]  Okay, next we have our interlocking appliances. The interlocking appliances have some  sort of mechanism to where they will... The upper and the lower are independent, and then  when they come together, they connect in that the lower will not be able to go backwards  because of its hitting on whatever stop on the upper. Okay, this one up in the corner here,  we refer to this as a dorsal fin appliance. It's a dorsal appliance, dorsal appliance. So any  09/01/25   Page   of 16   22

SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  of these appliances with the big old fins, we refer to as dorsal appliances. This one in the  center is the ProSomnus device from that company. This over here is the DNA appliance  sold by Vivos, which hopefully by the time you're watching this, that company's gone out of  business. I'll talk about that more later, but all of these are interlocking type of appliances.  Now, guess what patient you would want to avoid using an interlocking style appliance  with? What would the patient have evidence of doing?  [0:53:32]  And you would think, okay, I don't want to use this appliance. Did you say lateral bruxism?  Yes, good job, lateral bruxism. So if the patient has evidence of lateral bruxism, do not use  this style of appliance. And this is a huge mistake that dentists have made in the past is  they get on board with some company, SomnoMed or ProSomnus or whatever, and they  don't think it through. And again, the appliances are fine, but in the wrong patient, the pa -  tient will fight the appliance sometimes, and that will give them muscle pain, tooth pain,  and they'll give up. So I've had patients where they, for example, in the military, actually,  the ProSomnus was used quite a bit in the military, and I had a colonel there who didn't  like it. And looking at his teeth, I could see that he was a lateral bruxer. So we fit him with a  Herbst style appliance that allowed him to go side to side as much as he wanted to, and  he did great. So it was just kind of a decision or a mistake of one size fits all. So all these  appliances, as I've talked about before, they're all custom, but that mechanism is unique to  that mechanism.  [0:54:43]  So do not make the mistake of putting somebody with lateral bruxism in an appliance and  not move them lateral. Now, I've said this before, but you might be thinking, but wait, Jami -  son, if we protect their airway, won't they stop grinding their teeth? Won't they stop trying  to grind side to side? Maybe. And again, this goes back to hope for the best, plan for the  worst, hope that they do stop, because if they do stop, no problem. If they don't stop, so  we plan for the worst, which is they don't stop. Because remember, bruxism isn't all about  airway. Gosh, do I wish it was. That'd be amazing. But it's not all about airway all the time.  So there could be a medication that they're on that's causing them to clench behind their  teeth. Could be emotional stress, of course, could be things like that. So plan for the worst,  hope for the best. All right, some of our things with interlocking appliances. This is a good  choice for patients who, quote, sleep with their mouth open. In other words, there's no re -  sistance at all to opening. So people can just open their mouth and people that are kind of  claustrophobic and stuff like that, they'll really like that ability that they have to open.  [0:55:50]  Patients with minimal retentive features, this doesn't really have any requirement for great  retention. They could be missing teeth. You could actually do this over dentures if you  wanted to. The interlocking appliance is great for that as well. Patients with anterior peri -  odontal issues, as the forces are concentrated usually in the premolar or molar area, be -  cause that's where the little bumpers are. And you can completely cut it out in the front.  You could have it not touching their front teeth at all if you wanted to, and it would still work  just fine. Now, most of them don't allow much lateral movement. Now, there are sort of ex -  09/01/25   Page   of 17   22

SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  ceptions to this. I know ProSomnus, because it's digitally designed, you can tell them, hey,  I'd like those fins a little farther out to give the patient some side-to-side movement. So if  you want to use that device, make darn sure that you communicate to the lab to give that  patient some lateral range of motion. You can adjust the vertical. More vertical is easy.  Less vertical is super-duper hard. So if you kind of see how all these appliances fit togeth -  er, if I'm trying to make it smaller, that's tough because I've got these fins in the way and  stuff.  [0:56:59]  So on the ProSomnus device, for example, you have fins both top and bottom. So I can't  just put it on a lathe and grind it down to reduce the vertical. I'd have to do it with a burr,  and it'd be a pain in the butt. A dorsal fin like this one pictured here, it has the fin on the  bottom, so I can't adjust it easily. I could put the upper part on a lathe, but I'm only going to  have so much that I can take down there. So all interlocking appliances are hard to adjust  the vertical down. One of the reasons, again, why I talked about when you take the bite  record, you want to take it at the lowest vertical possible. Okay, lowest vertical possible,  that's where you're going to start because it's always easier to add vertical than it is to take  away vertical. Also, starting at the lowest vertical possible, you're going to have it easier to  close their lips around it, things like that. Sometimes there's some labs that they want it  thicker so that it won't break, but I'm not about that. If the patient can't close their lips  around the appliance, they're not going to wear it. So you want to make sure that that's at  the lowest vertical possible. If there's little holes in the back of the appliance or something  like that, I couldn't care less because that is a minor problem compared to they won't wear  it.  Mono Block Appliance   [0:58:13]  Okay, next and last is monoblock appliances. So the monoblock appliances, and I'll barely  even talk about these because we don't really use these anymore. Monoblock appliances  were part of the heritage of dental sleep medicine, but most people don't like monoblock  appliances because it does not allow you to move your jaw in any direction, sideways, for -  wards, backwards, up, down, anywhere. You're just kind of locked in to that position. This  appliance here, I'll kind of point out, this is called the Klearway appliance, and it is probably  still the number one researched appliance in the world because it's owned by the Universi -  ty of British Columbia, and so they always do their research on this. I don't know anybody  who uses this appliance outside of the researchers. I don't know anyone in our field that's  like, oh yeah, Klearway, that's my jam. I always use that appliance. Note that there's ball  clasp between all of the teeth.  [0:59:09]  There's this big cage up in the tongue space. It's kind of awful, and frankly, the fact that  people did well with it and it protected their airway is just a testament to how effective  09/01/25   Page   of 18   22

SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  mandibular advancement devices are because this is not the easiest appliance for anyone  to use. That's for darn sure. The Moses appliance was designed by Alan Moses with the  idea of like, hey, let's have as little material on the tongue side as possible and give that  tongue tons of space. This is the PM positioner by Dr. Parker. Dr. Parker doesn't use this  appliance anymore either, again, because he likes appliances that allow the patient to  move their jaw around a little bit more. So with our monoblocks, biggest issue is this no  ability to move your mandible in any way. There's little or no ability to adjust any vertical.  You've got to have the vertical just right, and if you want to change it, then you're going to  have to start from scratch. Critical that your bite registration is perfect and that the lab  makes it exactly there because if it's just kind of haphazard or the lab doesn't use your bite  record, heaven forbid, then they would make it in a different spot and it's possible that the  person's teeth won't go in that position.  [1:00:24]  The advantage of all the other appliances is we have upper-lower and it can be off a little  bit and you can adjust it in the mouth, adjust where they're hitting and things like that. The  monoblock, you don't get that option. If the initial bite registration position is posterior and  the patient has a steep articular eminence, the bite will want to open as you adjust the ap -  pliance forward. What's that supposed to mean? So because it's all one piece here, as the  person comes forward, if their jaw comes down the articular eminence, that's going to  open up that Bennett movement, that shift in the posterior and the appliance won't fit as  well. Now you probably wouldn't notice because the patient won't notice, but it will not be  on their, it won't be fully seated anymore in the back. So that's a problem too. There's an  assumption here that when you're kind of bringing the jaw forward, it's doing it exactly in a  straight line plane. No way is that happening. So be careful with that too. I mean, bottom  line, frankly, we don't use these anymore. So you can and the thing that we learn from the  monoblock appliance though is that people can tolerate monoblock appliances.  [1:01:36]  So there are cases, and I'll talk about this in level two, where we will bond the EMA to -  gether, for example, if someone stretching bands out all the time, but they're fine, their air -  way is protected, they don't have periodontal issues, and we're like, you know what, yeah,  let's go ahead and do this, we don't have to replace the bands as much, and they'll do  great. But eventually, as their sleep apnea gets worse or whatever, then we have to cut it  apart and bring their jaw into a different position. So for most of us, it's just way more con -  venient for us and the patients to have an appliance that's a little bit easier to adjust. May  be a good choice for people with less retentive features. What will happen with this appli -  ance is they'll open and it will sort of dislodge, but then as soon as they close, it'll go right  back to the same spot. Most other appliances don't do that. Your dorsal fins will because  it's top and bottom like that, but this appliance, it's a monoblock, but if they open, it'll just  pop off. Usually the upper teeth will come out of it, and then when they swallow, it goes  right back to where it was.  09/01/25   Page   of 19   22

SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  Unique Appliances   [1:02:40]  We do have some unique appliances on the market. These are not used much by folks,  but there are some appliances that you may come across. This is the Oasis, and the Oasis  we would kind of put into that interlocking category. So it's got that lower with this upper,  and when the person closes down, this hits on their upper front teeth to keep them from  going back. So it's kind of a unique interlocking appliance, so to speak. It's adjusted by that  burr coming forward. This is, I won't remember all these names on these appliances, but  this appliance has a little piece of material here that goes down the throat. The guy who  invented that died multiple years ago. I'm not sure anybody uses this appliance anymore.  This is the DNA appliance, so it's got all these wires and stuff. The idea behind that appli -  ance, and it's got a palatal expansion screw, is that that's going to expand the arches in an  adult. That's never been shown to be true. And as I mentioned before, hopefully by the  time you watch this, that company's out of business. They've done a lot of damage, I think,  to the field because of this.  [1:03:58]  There is articles and research to show that all it does is tip teeth, and this can cause all  sorts of problems. I think for most of us, the goal is to not move teeth, to not change bites.  This one, that is the goal, is to do those things. This appliance has a mechanism to allow  for mouth breathing. Most of us think that mouth breathing's bad. That appliance company  went out of business for a while, but then got brought back. They went bankrupt, and then  they came back. So a lot of these are not really appliances that we would use. This appli -  ance is kind of a cool idea. It's called the Medli, and the guy who invented this appliance  wanted it to be a Herbst or an EMA. So you see those other notches there. You can add  other hooks, and it could be a pull-style appliance or a push-style appliance. That's cool,  but again, really kind of never took off because it's additional expense and additional has -  sle. So a lot of people don't use that appliance either.  Temporary/Trial Appliances   [1:04:57]  Temporary trial appliances. So why would you want to use a temporary trial appliance?  Well, maybe the patient needs something. So in our case, in our practice, the number one  use for temporary trial appliances is the person has forgotten their appliance, they've lost  their appliance, the dog ate their appliance, and they need something right now. So after  you've gotten used to having a good night's sleep, you're not really excited about not get -  ting a good night's sleep. And so this will be the main time that we use these temporary  trial appliances. In general, though, we don't use them because it just adds to the cost of  treatment. However, let's say that you were fee-for-service, then you might talk to your pa -  tient and say, hey, we can try this, you know, it's $350 or whatever.  [1:05:47]  09/01/25   Page   of 20   22

SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  If you like it, it's not really long-term. It's just for you to use for a few weeks, see if it's effec -  tive, see what your bed partner says, stuff like that, and then we can move on from there.  My favorite temporary trial appliance is this one here called the MyTap, and it's got the vol -  ume control knob on the front. That's why it's my favorite. It's also very small, pretty easy  for the patient to tolerate, but that volume control knob is pretty awesome because if they  have a bed partner, the bed partner can literally roll over and turn the volume control knob  and find the effective jaw position. Now, you might be thinking I'm joking about that. I'm not  joking about that. That's what it was designed for. It was designed by Dr. Thornton with the  idea of, okay, we're going to use this in the sleep lab, and they're going to go in the sleep  lab, and the sleep tech will come in and turn the knob, and we'll find that right jaw position.  The only bummer with the MyTap is that it's a little expensive, so it's about $130, I believe.  And then the other bummer is it's kind of more comfortable than most of the TAP appli -  ances, so be careful with that. So if you do use the MyTap, then you need to let the patient  know if you're moving towards another appliance. And again, as I talked about earlier,  maybe you would go to the FlexTap, which is just like the MyTap, but even though it's  called the FlexTap, it's pretty hard, and it's thicker.  [1:07:06]  So you would just warn them that's like, hey, this appliance we're making you long-term is  going to be a little thicker, a little bit more robust, so that it will last for a long time. But  there's lots of others of these on the market. This one here I invented, it's called the Silent  Sleep. We almost never use that in our practice anymore. It can be handy over Invisalign  retainers. However, probably by the time you're watching this, I've already developed a  way to do this 3D printed, because the bummer with this appliance is that all that pink stuff  is GC Reline material, and that's like $80 a tube. So it's expensive to reline it. I mean, it's  not $80, but it's probably $25 of material to fit this, and that's a drag. So I want to be able  to have you be able to print this to go over aligners, and then you can just do it in-house  for probably cost you $10. So that should be available by the time you're watching this. If  it's not, then I came across some snag that made it so that it couldn't be, but that's what  we're working on right now. Temporary trials, the biggest problem with boil-and-bite appli -  ances is they're terrible/difficult, painful to fit, poor retention, bulky, lack of tongue space.  All of this gets worse over time. Bad, bad news. So all the boil-and-bites are pretty much  awful.  [1:08:29]  The temporary trial appliances can be used for all these different reasons that I put down  here and the ones that I just talked about. Again, it's usually like maybe they're having  some dentistry done, so you don't want to go to the definitive appliance yet, or again, the  dog ate their appliance, or we can do it over aligners, or maybe you want to do it with a  kiddo, and we're looking at doing some other stuff, or as a spare appliance for when  they're traveling. I've fit probably the majority of temporary trial appliances I fit have been  on dentists who come to a course with me, and they're like, hey, Jamison, I forgot my ap -  pliance. Do you happen to have a temporary around? And then we'll fit in with a temporary.  All right, let's do these last couple and take a little break. All right, so I started here with the  09/01/25   Page   of 21   22

SSC 2.0 - 115: Custom Appliance Selection  appliance selection. Here's a slide that has all of those different things to consider, the lat -  eral bruxer, the ability to keep the mouth open, the metal allergy, all that stuff with all of the  different appliances that you might choose.  [1:09:31]  So print this out, take a picture of it so that you can reference this slide when you are de -  ciding on appliances. And here's a little chart that I put together that goes over, again, the  majority, not every one of those things I had on there, but most of them. It goes through all  of these on the side here and then the five different mechanisms of action, anterior pull-  push, push, pull, interlocking, and monoblocks. Now you will see good and not ideal, and  that's the range. So good is as good as I'm going to say, and then not ideal means basical -  ly don't use it. So this can help you make decisions on what I should use with this certain  case. Bottom line, I would strongly encourage you to get familiar with each of these styles  other than monoblock.  [1:10:21]  I don't think in today's day and age you need to use monoblocks ever, so I would probably  not even worry about those. Like I said, the good news with monoblocks is we know that  some people can tolerate them. I can tolerate a monoblock appliance. So you can make  other appliances monoblocks if you need to for some reason, but I wouldn't have that be  my go-to appliance because there's other appliances just easier for you to handle and for  patients to tolerate. So I would strongly encourage you to get an anterior pull-push for  yourself, a push appliance for yourself, a pull appliance for yourself, and an interlocking  appliance for yourself and see how you feel with those and how you do. And if you're a lat -  eral bruxer, that'll be great because then you can see what happens when you have the  interlocking appliance. If you're not, then you're going to do fine with all of them. So that's  the thing. If you're not a lateral bruxer, you can pretty much wear anything. So I can wear  any type of appliance. I do fine with all of them. I happen to like the EMA appliance the  best, but really I can tolerate all appliances and they have similar effects, all of them. Do  that yourself so that you can then communicate with your patients, and then you'll have  those appliances as your initial examples of appliances to show your patients as well.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 22   22

