SSC 2.0 - 202: Referral  SSC 2.0   Level 2  202: Referral  [intro music]  Referral   [0:00:12]  All right, so we've screened our patients and now we're going to make a referral. Here's a  couple different options, if you will. Refer to a sleep doctor or a family doctor and let them  make the decision as to an in-lab study or home study. Now I'm going to talk more in a  second about the why I put both on here and why you will decide if it's a sleep doctor or a  family doctor. Here's the question that I ask. Would you be open to having an initial consult  with a sleep doctor or your primary care doctor to see if your bruxism, poor sleep, tired -  ness, TMJ problem, whatever, might be related to a sleep issue? Okay, let me say that  again. Would you be open to having an initial consult with sleep doctor to see if your brux -  ism might be related to a sleep issue? That's my sales pitch. I have never, nor have my  partners ever, referred anyone for a sleep study. We don't refer people for sleep studies.  You'll hear that said all the time at other courses and stuff like that. The dentist saying, "Oh  yeah, I referred him for a sleep study." Now, frankly, sometimes they are referring them for  a sleep study, so to speak.  [0:01:25]  What they're doing nowadays is they work with some company that does the home sleep  testing. Really, when you're doing that, you basically are referring for a sleep study, even  though there's going to be a telemedicine visit. I'd love to see the stats on that of how  many times there's a telemedicine visit and the doctor with the home sleep testing compa -  ny says, "Yeah, I don't think we need to do a home sleep test on you." That's probably  never happened. Whereas if you're referring to a primary care doctor, that could happen.  I'll go over that more in a second. A sleep doctor probably is going to do a sleep study.  However, it's their call. I never, ever, ever, never, ever, ever refer for a sleep study. All I'm  referring for is, would you be open to having a conversation? You don't even need to say a  consult. “Would you be open to having a conversation with a sleep doctor about this pos -  sible problem? ”   If they're saying, "Yeah, I'd be open to that." Cool. By the way, if they do  decide to get a sleep study, man, do I hope you have sleep apnea, and they may find that  weird.  [0:02:32]  You're going to say after you do that and look at them and they're like, "Weird, that's rude.  Why are you saying you hope I have sleep apnea?" Say, "Because if you do have sleep  apnea, then it's possible that your bruxism, your TMJ problem, your daytime fatigue could  09/01/25   Page   of 1   15

SSC 2.0 - 202: Referral  be related to that sleep apnea problem. The nice thing about sleep apnea is if it's treated  by either CPAP or oral appliance therapy or the different options that we have, you don't  have it. It's a mechanical thing. So if we can treat this mechanically, you don't have it. So  that'd be super cool." So that's the dialogue there.  [0:03:08]  Now, I mentioned a few minutes ago that I lived in North Carolina and in North Carolina, I  learned that there's a difference in how people would react to a question like this. So  where I'm from in Idaho, if you ask somebody, "Would you be open to having an initial  consult with a sleep doctor?" And they don't want to, they'll probably say, "Well, no, thank  you. No, I'm not really interested in that." Maybe where you are too, people are more direct  on that. Again, not rude, not in a mean way, but just like, "Yeah, no thanks." And just be  honest with you. In North Carolina, that wasn't the case. People tended to have this whole  Southern hospitality thing and they would be super nice. I never forget that the first neigh -  borhood that we lived in in North Carolina, there was no one in the neighborhood from  North Carolina, yet the Southern hospitality was unbelievable in that neighborhood. I've  lived all over the place and never had we had so many nice people. So in North Carolina, I  had to modify this a little bit because I learned that if I said, "Would you be open to having  this?"  [0:04:08]  People would be like, "Yeah." And they had no intention of doing anything. And this is not  our goal. Your goal is not to all of a sudden flood your local sleep doctor's office with a  bunch of garbage referrals. And what I mean by garbage, I'm not referring to the person.  I'm referring to the fact that they don't want to go. And so you're going to send over infor -  mation or whatever. And then they're going to be trying to get these people on the phone  and they're going to ignore them. It's not a good referral. You only want to send people  who are really serious about going. So I added this question. "Will you promise me you'll  do this?" And I found in North Carolina anyway, that people didn't like to promise when  they weren't going to do something. So they didn't like to lie.  [0:04:50]  And then the last step is we'd walk them to the front desk and get the sleep doctor or the  primary care doctor's office on the phone right now to help them set up an appointment.  And something that I'm proud of out there is I would have sleep doctors routinely talk  about how awesome our referrals were from that dental practice. It's a big group practice.  And they would say, "Yeah, man, the referrals that you guys send, they're really motivated  and they know why they're there. And they're excited to move to the next step with diagno -  sis. And they're just so much better than the referrals I get from most of my medical col -  leagues."  [0:05:29]  Now, part of that was because we were picking the people that were serious about moving  forward. I strongly encourage you to do the same thing. You're going to see people every  day, sometimes all day, that are at high risk for sleep-related breathing disorders. But have  the conversations, ask them these questions, "Would you be open to having that consult?  09/01/25   Page   of 2   15

SSC 2.0 - 202: Referral  Would you be open to having a conversation?" And if they're hesitant at all, then I'll be like,  "You know what? Hey, let's don't do anything right now. However, here's the things I want  you to look for. Okay, remember, have you fallen asleep at the wheel yet? Have you fallen  asleep at work yet? Have you had any of these other problems yet? If you start having any  of this, I want you to call me because it's very serious, like deadly serious, and we can do  something then. But for right now, I'm just going to note in the chart that we talked about  this. We'll talk about this next time I see you." Okay, that's cool too.  Your Guide to Working with Physicians   [0:06:23]  So I mentioned working with a sleep doctor or primary care doctor. So here's your guide to  working with physicians. We have primary care physicians, and then we have sleep doc -  tors. These are going to be the main doctors that we work with in a sleep-related practice,  for those of you doing sleep and TMD. But right now, this section, we're talking about  sleeps. That's why I'm setting it up this way. All right, so primary care doctors, they care  about different priorities than sleep doctors do. And sleep doctors are specialists. And  sleep doctors come in three main varieties. No one goes to med school and then directly  to sleep doctor school. So they go through a specialty. And the majority of sleep doctors  are, first and foremost.  Sleep Doctors (Pulmonologists)   [0:07:13]  Pulmonologists. So roughly 70% or more of sleep doctors in the United States are going to  be pulmonologists. Well, what treatment do you think pulmonologists really are into?  CPAP, right? So these guys are about blowing air into the lungs, and that's how they got  involved in sleep apnea in the first place. The original gangsters of sleep medicine are  pulmonologists. And they were looking at people breathing, stopping breathing. It's an air -  way, airflow thing. Apnea hypopnea index, that's about stopping airflow.  [0:07:50]  That's why it's all focused on airflow. And the definition isn't all about brainwaves or other  factors that it could have been about, depending if there would have been a different spe -  cialty that would have started all of the nomenclature and terminology in the field. So pul -  monologists are going to have a special focus on breathing, and they're going to particular -  ly like CPAP in generalities here. Why that's important is if you know that a sleep doctor is  a pulmonologist, that that's their background, and you're like, "Hey, pulmonologist sleep  doctor, good news for you. I have had extra training in dental sleep medicine. I'm a mem -  ber of Spencer Study Club. We've treated thousands and thousands of people with oral  appliance therapy, and that's good news for you because everybody knows CPAP sucks.  Okay, technically it blows. Everybody knows that nobody's using their CPAP, and I'm here  09/01/25   Page   of 3   15

SSC 2.0 - 202: Referral  to save the day." Okay, pulmonologists are not going to take kindly to that. So when I have  a connection with a pulmonologist sleep doctor, my first connection with them is, "Hey, do  you ever have patients that can't tolerate use of their CPAP for some reason?" And they'll  be like, "Sometimes there's people that can't tolerate it."  [0:09:06]  I'll go, "We've had patients where we've done an oral appliance in conjunction with their  CPAP, used simultaneously, and it's able to reduce the pressure, and that's helped them  use their CPAP better. I'd love to help more of your patients actually use their CPAP."  Okay, there is a winning message. That's how you win friends amongst the pulmonolo -  gists.  Sleep Doctors (Neurologist)   [0:09:32]  Our next group of sleep doctors is our neurologists. So neurologists, they make up maybe  20% or so of the sleep doctors. And these doctors got into the field because of the squig -  gly lines. So brainwaves, and they figured out different stages of sleep and what goes on  in these different stages. And they talk about arousals from different stages of sleep and  sleep efficiency and stuff like that. They're about the squiggly lines. So what treatment do  you think that neurologists would really be into if it existed? Now that last part there threw  you a curveball, right? Well, what do neurologists, in a typical neurology practice, what do  they typically do for treatment? No, not brain stimulation or shock therapy. [laughter] You're  thinking of someone else. Neurologists put people on drugs. So they would be all about a  medication for sleep apnea if it existed.  [0:10:37]  And these are being developed. So in 2025, as I record this, there are a couple medica -  tions like Ozempic and stuff like that that have been labeled to be used for obstructive  sleep apnea, but that's just due to the weight loss issues with it. There are on the other  hand, drugs that are in the final stages of approval that will have a mechanism to stiffen  the tissues of the airway and to make it less collapsible. Once that happens, that there's a  medication, that I would expect neurologists to be more excited about that as a treatment  modality because they know pharmacology, they know medications, that's where they live,  that's what they do, and so they'll be tending towards that. Another cool thing about neu -  rologist sleep doctors, as I mentioned all the brainwave stuff, neurologist sleep doctors in  general like to get in-lab studies because they don't get all the brainwave information from  a home sleep test typically. So there are some home sleep tests that use surrogates, there  are one or two that do attach to the forehead, but the neurologist is going to be a little bit  more purist on that and they're going to be like, eh, that's better than nothing, I guess, but I  don't love that. So neurologists will tend to try to get people into the sleep lab whenever  possible.  [0:12:00]  09/01/25   Page   of 4   15

SSC 2.0 - 202: Referral  So if you have a neurologist sleep doctor, think about those things. Think about, "Wow,  doc, wouldn't it be great if we could get the patient into the sleep lab and really know how  they're sleeping, frankly, if they're sleeping, rather than these home sleep tests?" They're  going to like you discussing that. They will tend to be agnostic with regard to treatment  right now because CPAP and surgeries and oral appliance therapy aren't drugs. So they'll  tend to be open-minded about the different treatments out there, whereas if there was a  medication, they would tend to, in general, lean more towards that if it was found to be ef -  fective.  Sleep Doctors (ENT)   [0:12:32]  Okay, next, we have our ENT sleep doctors. Now, my gosh, do I love ENT sleep doctors.  Unfortunately, there are a lot less of them. So this is maybe 5% or 10% of the whole field. I  have several friends that are ENT sleep doctors, and I love these doctors. I wish that they  were in my community. They aren't. And I love the sleep doctors I work with. Don't get me  wrong. But I have, in my career, tended to have pulmonologist sleep doctors that I work  with, and I hit it off with them too. ENT sleep doctors are special because they think like  us. They are surgeons like we are. They're surgeons. And surgeons care all about out -  comes, and they don't tend to dink around with stuff that doesn't work. So they've tried to  cut out the palate a million different ways, and they know it's not very effective. So they  now look at oral appliance therapy, many of them, as the first-line treatment because they  understand the anatomy behind it. They like the anatomical effect of it, as they also like  CPAP. CPAP also has that anatomical effect.  [0:13:38]  Now, you may think, "Yeah, but, Jamison, these guys are going to put people on Inspire."  No, they won't tend to because, as I said a second ago, they value outcomes. And Inspire  isn't giving the fabulous outcomes that they like or that they're used to. CPAP gets AHIs to  zero. So the reason it's the gold standard is it gets those measures that they're looking for,  HI, down to zero really, really well. Inspire doesn't as much. So Inspire is still based... It's  limited on the anatomy that they're given. And you firm up those tissues by electrical stimu -  lation, only go so far. So you will have reduction in HI, but if you compare Inspire to oral  appliance therapy, oral appliance therapy is going to win every time. And oral appliance  therapy is way less expensive. There's no scar. There's no thing that you've got to stick in  their body. There's no battery to replace. And it's still compliance-based. So that's the  bummer with Inspire is they still got to turn it on.  [0:14:43]  So if I haven't told you the story or to repeat this story, I have an office manager in my  Boise office who has Inspire. And it was $180,000 that Blue Cross was billed for her In -  spire. I'm sure Blue Cross didn't pay that much, but that's what they were billed. And she  didn't like it, wouldn't use it. And then eventually she had to have that removed. So big deal  09/01/25   Page   of 5   15

SSC 2.0 - 202: Referral  there. And the ENTs, because of them knowing about this, they are more likely to lean to -  wards oral appliance therapy and CPAP than Inspire. There'll be exceptions to that rule,  but in general, that's what we're dealing with.  Sleep Doctors (Primary Care)   [0:15:23]  Now there's also a unicorn, and that is your primary care sleep doctor. Now these are su -  per rare. I happen to get to know one in my time in North Carolina. And come to think of it,  I'm trying to think of another primary care doctor, sleep doctor. I'm not sure I can think of  another one. And he was amazing. The big difference between primary care doctors and  specialists sleep doctors, and this is really important for you to remember, is primary care  doctors, if you send a patient to a primary care doctor for that initial consultation conversa -  tion, and the person goes in and goes, "I'm tired all the time. I am falling asleep at the  wheel. I'm not sure what's going on here, doc." What's a primary care doctor going to do  first that a sleep doctor wouldn't? Okay, now you may think different things here. Cut to the  chase here. It's labs. Did you get labs? Gold star for you if you got, they're going to do  labs. In other words, they're going to have the patient pee in a cup, and they're going to  draw some blood.  [0:16:25]  Sleep doctors won't do that. Why not? Because in their world, the patients are all referred  by medical doctors, primary care doctors, cardiologists, internal medicine doctors, family  medicine doctors. Those people did the labs. That's how they start. If you go to the doctor,  and almost anything other than a musculoskeletal issue, they're going to start with labs,  aren't they? So I'm tired all the time. Is there more than an airway issue that could make  you tired? Yeah, there is. A lot more. So a primary care doctor is going to get those labs.  That's super cool because this means you're not going to miss somebody with an iron de -  ficiency. This is one of the reasons that I am not a fan of you as a dentist working with  some home sleep testing company that's five states away and they're going to do some  telemedicine thing and they're going to do an HST that they send them in the mail and  they're going to say, "Yeah, you've got sleep apnea, do an oral appliance." And you're go -  ing to miss all this real medicine. Is that how you'd want to be treated? Is that how you'd  want your wife to be treated, your husband to be treated, your kid to be treated?  [0:17:29]  Not me. I want to do a actual good diagnosis. So I love working with primary care doctors  because they're going to do that level of comprehensive examination that a specialist's  not. And this is not a knock on specialists. It's that in medicine, this is how it's built. You go  to the primary care doctor, they do all of the foundational stuff, and then if necessary, send  you to the specialist. So the specialist assumes all that's been done. That's a disconnect  when we refer from a dental office because we didn't do labs. I don't know about you. I  don't do labs in my practice. It's not a normal thing that we do. It's nothing we ever do. So  09/01/25   Page   of 6   15

SSC 2.0 - 202: Referral  could I miss underlying metabolic issues that I'm just all looking about anatomy? I'm look -  ing from a surgical standpoint here of an airway issue, an anatomical airway issue, and I  miss something that a primary care doctor would have picked up. I think so. So that is my  bully pulpit there that I'd like you working with primary care doctors. Encourage them to get  the labs, do the stuff. If the primary care doctor thinks referral to a sleep doctor is indicat -  ed, go for it. If the primary care doctor wants to work with that home sleep testing company  five states away and you can connect them with them, great. But the primary care doctor is  running the show, making sure good medicine is done, making sure a good diagnosis is  done, and then directing care accordingly. So there is your guide to primary care doctors  and sleep doctors.  Pediatric Sleep Doctor   [0:19:00]  Now let's discuss who to send someone to if you want a kid in your practice to get their  tonsils out. Now, I'm not going to spend a ton of time on the kiddo stuff, but in a nutshell,  my personal feeling is, when in doubt rule it out, which means get a sleep study on the kid,  and if the kid has an HI over one, then we need to do something, and we don't need to do  something over the next months with regard to palate expansion or whatever. We need to  do something as fast as possible. So for me, that is tonsilloadenoidectomy. And my par -  adigm then is to refer not to primary care and not to ENT. It's to refer to a pediatric sleep  doctor. Now why to a pediatric sleep doctor, is a pediatric sleep doctor almost always will  get a sleep study. And unlike, as I was saying before, the value of working with a primary  care doctor for an adult is them getting the labs and all that stuff. With a kiddo, we're pretty  confident that it's not an iron deficiency or something like that, or some other thing that's  going on with them. It's probably an airway issue, an anatomical airway issue.  [0:20:21]  So if you send to the primary care doctor, the pediatrician in this case, or an ENT, they are  very, and I mean very, likely to say, "Those tonsils aren't so big. That's not that. I'm sure  they're fine." Or they are going to consider the insurance aspects of, well, we need to  have, three strep infections documented within a year or something like that in order to  move forward with tonsilloadenoidectomy. A sleep study is an indication for tonsilloade -  noidectomy. It's medical necessity. So go directly to a pediatric sleep doctor. Now you may  be saying to yourself, "Well, easier said than done, Jamison. I don't have a pediatric sleep  doctor in my community." Well, you're right. You may not. And this may be a case where  they got to get in a car and go to the university that has a pediatric sleep doctor there and  set that up. And it may take a little while to get in. Now on the may take a little while to get  in, if it's more than a few months to get in, then feel free to start the myofunctional therapy  and planning for the palatal expansion or even starting palatal expansion. That's not going  to get in the way of the ENT taking the tonsils and adenoids out. But getting the tonsils and  adenoids out is going to be the quickest route to a more open airway.  09/01/25   Page   of 7   15

SSC 2.0 - 202: Referral  [0:21:39]  Now, as you remember me talking about my son Jeff, that doesn't mean that it's one and  done. Adenoids can come back and we can have other issues. But as far as a fast as pos -  sible impact on the kid, tonsilloadenoidectomy. How do you get to the tonsilloadenoidec -  tomy? Not through pediatrician, not through ENT, through the pediatric sleep doctor who  will get the sleep study. And if the HI is over one, then the pediatric sleep doctor will order  the sleep study. That is how to do it.  Paperwork   [0:22:11]  Okay, paperwork. So we've got some referral form that you're going to have, and this is  going to vary with the sleep doctors you work with, some of your sleep doctors you may,  this is actually rather rare currently, but it's getting more common, that you could get on  their system. A lot of doctors are on Epic is their EMR and the hospital system and all that  stuff. But bottom line is the sleep doctor or primary care doctor that you're going to work  with is going to have some way of referrals, and oftentimes in the medical world, this is  done via fax. That doesn't mean a piece of paper coming through a machine at the other  side, but now it's eFax. It's going to the computer system. That's the normal way to do it.  [0:22:56]  And with all of this paperwork, some of the reason for all of this stuff is you're going to  have their paperwork, you're going to have your screening form, you're going to have the  health history, you're going to have the medical insurance card front and back. And why all  of this stuff is important is getting paid, frankly. And not just for you, but at this point in the  game, the doctor you're referring to is going to need some of that information in order to  make their lives easier. Now, one of the reasons too, just to give you a little bit more be -  hind the scenes and thought process on this, and this applies to those of you who practice  in the United States, but one of the reasons I refer for a consultation and never refer for a  sleep study is part of this paperwork insurance game. A patient needs a face-to-face with a  physician prior to the sleep study to show that a sleep study was indicated. Okay, this  would be similar with any other medical test. You go in, you're having headaches, and  you've tried different things, and so they're going to document why they're sending you for  an MRI.  [0:24:14]  You don't just walk into the MRI center like, "I'd really like an MRI." And they submit that to  your insurance, "Well, because Jamison wanted an MRI." So there has to be medical ne -  cessity. A dentist referring isn't considered good enough for medical necessity, so there  has to be a usually face-to-face, that can be telemedicine sometimes, but there has to be  some sort of connection with a medical doctor, or in some cases it can also be a nurse  practitioner or a PA, whatever. Bottom line though, a consult occurs, and then there's a  decision that was made to refer the person for a sleep study. This probably, in the year  09/01/25   Page   of 8   15

SSC 2.0 - 202: Referral  2025 when I'm recording this and beyond, this shouldn't be something you have to teach  sleep doctors, but it's possible that you could. So let me just explain to you again how this  works is normally a primary care doctor, internal medicine doctor, cardiologist, whatever,  refers for a sleep study. They usually don't refer for a consult. They refer for a sleep study.  The patient goes and gets that sleep study, in-lab or HST, whatever. It is read, interpreted  by the sleep doctor. A report is sent back to primary care.  [0:25:43]  Primary care is running the whole show. The patient in that scenario rarely even meets the  sleep doctor. Sometimes they will if there's something special about it, but most time they  won't. That's normal. When we're in the mix here, it's not normal. The other day, as a mat -  ter of fact, I was trying to refer my 17-year-old son, to a pediatric sleep doctor, and on the  phone, the person was like, "Hey, we're going to need the notes." And I'm like, "No, you're  not, because you want notes because you're thinking you're going to have to have that for  insurance purposes to get paid." And she's like, "Well, no, that's our policy is we need the  notes before we can see the patient." And I'm like, "Okay, do you understand I'm a dentist?  I'm not a medical doctor. My notes aren't going to do anything for you. So my notes are  this is my son, and I think he needs a consultation with the pediatric sleep doctor." And  they're like, "Yeah, well, we need the notes." And it's frustrating to me, because we couldn't  make an appointment with that doctor directly because of their policy.  [0:26:48]  And they're with the University of Utah, and I'm not surprised that they have some hurdles  to jump over. So I'm going to have to have my partner, Dr. Mangelson, see my son Jared  and write down, "Yeah, Jared's tired or sleeping 50 hours a day and whatever. So there -  fore, we need him to be seen at your office, and then it will all be fine." So figure out what  needs to be done. What does the medical doctor's office need from you in order to make  that referral, and you might have to, this is relatively rare, but you might have to actually  educate them on, "Hey, I'm not referring for a sleep study. I'm referring for a consultation."  Because you guys are going to need that face-to-face with the sleep doctor before you're  going to get paid for a sleep study. And if they don't understand that, which believe it or  not, they may not understand that. If they don't understand that, then eventually they're go -  ing to be upset because people you refer there, they're going to do a sleep study, and then  they won't get paid on it because they won't have the proper documentation. All right, so  that's all of this paperwork stuff.  What’s Next? Then What?   [0:27:52]  All right, then what? So help the patient get in for an evaluation of the sleep doctor or their  family doctor. Follow up to see if the patient actually moves forward. Let me talk about that  real quick. Why would you choose one or the other? So the rule of thumb is if I want the  person to get a sleep study, I refer to a sleep doctor for a consultation. If I'm not as con -  09/01/25   Page   of 9   15

SSC 2.0 - 202: Referral  cerned about the patient having a sleep study, then I refer to their primary care doctor and  ideally talk to their primary care doctor before the patient sees them. All right, now you may  be asking, well, why would that even be some of your thought process of like, well, maybe  the person doesn't need a sleep study? Well, a couple of things. So maybe they've already  said that they're not excited about getting a sleep study at all. Maybe they are a profes -  sional, like you and I are professionals, and they don't want sleep apnea on their records,  because it would cost them more for life insurance. It would cost them more for health in -  surance. That's a stupid thing about sleep apnea because if you have sleep apnea and it's  treated, you don't have sleep apnea.  [0:29:01]  But that's not how insurances work. They consider that as now you're higher risk for a  stroke and heart attack and all this stuff because you have it. So maybe that's the reason  that they don't want to. Maybe they're a pilot, a private pilot, and they know that that's bad  to have sleep apnea on their records. So there are various reasons that a person would  not necessarily want to have a sleep study. In those cases, they will be very reluctant to go  and see a sleep doctor because they're smart enough to realize that a sleep doctor is  probably going to get a sleep study. But on the other hand, they would typically be open to  talking to their primary care doctor. So what I say in those cases is, "Hey, patient, I under -  stand you're not really excited about a sleep study. I don't know if you need a sleep study  or not. I'm your dentist. I just want you to have a consult with the sleep doctor. But since  you've brought up those points of why you don't really want to do that, that's okay. So how  about we go to your primary care doctor because I can treat you for your snoring. I can  help you with this stuff that's bothering you, but I need to talk to your primary care doctor to  decide what the next step are because they know your medical history better than I do."  [0:30:14]  I've never had a patient yet that's like, "Yeah, no way. You don't get to talk to my primary  care doctor." Never had that happen. So they'll typically say, "Okay, yeah, that makes  sense." You call the primary care doctor and you talk to the primary care doctor and, "Hey,  common patient, and he's snoring and he said his wife says he notices that he's stop  breathing and some other issues. I've talked to him about possibly seeing a sleep doctor.  He's not excited about getting a sleep study because he's a private pilot. I'm talking to you  because you're his doctor. You know his medical history better than I do. There's an option  that I could treat him with oral appliance therapy for his snoring, but I will only do that if you  give me the green light because you don't think that a sleep study is indicated. What do  you think, doc?"  [0:31:02]  Then that's it. Just throw them the ball and wait to see what they say. Most of the time, the  primary care doctor will be like, "Yeah, I don't think sleep study is indicated. The oral appli -  ance thing that you make, if that helps the snoring and makes him feel better, I'm sure it's  working." That's it. And then you would note in your chart, talk to the patient's doctor. The  patient's doctor does not feel that a sleep study is indicated at this time. Moving forward  with treating the patient with an oral appliance for his snoring. Remember in the ADA  09/01/25   Page   of 10   15

SSC 2.0 - 202: Referral  guidelines stuff, it didn't say diddly about snoring. It was talking about obstructive sleep  apnea. So we have no diagnosis. You don't need a prescription. You could ask for one if  you wanted. If you are building that relationship with the primary care doctor, "Hey, primary  care doctor, understood, no sleep study indicated. If you wouldn't mind, these oral appli -  ances are prescription only, and I really like working with the patient's doctor like you on  this. If it wouldn't be too big of a hassle for you to write out a prescription, oral appliance  for the patient's snoring, that would be awesome. And you could just fax it over here to our  office. That'd be great."  [0:32:10]  You could do that. You don't necessarily need to do that. But if you feel that you've got  rapport with the doctor and that that wouldn't be a big deal for him, then that's going to ac -  tually cover you even more should heaven forbid, there be any problems down the road.  So if I'm completely fine with the primary care doctor making the decision on sleep study  or not, then primary care doctor, and refer to primary care doctor for those reasons that  I've discussed already of doing the labs and all that stuff. If I'm more like I want them to get  a sleep study, and a scenario there would be they've already had a sleep study, but now  they're 30 pounds heavier and 10 years older. Okay, I need a sleep study. I really don't  want to treat them on their baseline from 10 years ago with an AHI of 12, and now they're  30 pounds heavier and 10 pounds older. 30 pounds heavier and 10 years older. And I'm  thinking I'm treating mild sleep apnea, and actually I'm treating super severe sleep apnea.  I'd want to know what I'm treating. So think that through and your referral can go accord -  ingly.  [0:33:12]  All right. So that's bullet point one. Bullet point two, once a sleep evaluation has been per -  formed, then here's our options or our outcomes rather. The patient was found to not have  sleep apnea. Well, maybe a night guard's indicated. And maybe that night guard is a  mandibular stabilization appliance that is something that keeps our jaw from falling back -  wards. Okay. So then you would know you're protecting their airway. Remember, a night  guard or even a night guard with a little ramp on it, like a Farrar-style night guard, learn  more about that in level three. But those things are only working if the person has their  teeth on it. So if their teeth are apart, their jaw's relaxed, their jaw can slack back and  block their airway. So if you are concerned that the person has an airway issue and their  doctor decided not to get a sleep study, you could start with a traditional night guard, but  be watching for those telltale signs of, "Yeah, I can't wear this. It makes me snore. It  makes me gag. I'm taking it out in the middle of the night. I'm not sure why." Or you could  just start with a mandibular stabilization appliance, I'm calling it. That's my new term for  these things, which would be a sleep appliance that's not being used to protrude the  mandible.  [0:34:20]  So it's not a mandibular advancement device. It's a mandibular stabilization appliance. It's  keeping the jaw from falling backwards. We're not actively bringing it forward. So you  could use an appliance like that for their bruxism. Understand? You're using that for their  09/01/25   Page   of 11   15

SSC 2.0 - 202: Referral  bruxism. All right. Next, patient was found to have sleep apnea. Medical doctor would like  them to try CPAP first. Cool. No problem with that at all. Don't get your feelings hurt that  they want to do CPAP. I love my patients doing CPAP first because CPAP is pretty hard to  use. And an oral appliance is like a walk in the park compared to CPAP. Compared to  nothing, an oral appliance is a hassle. If you're not wearing anything to sleep and you nev -  er have for 45 years, putting something in your mouth at night and having to deal with that  and brush it and take care of it it's not that big a deal. But that's probably because you  wear one yourself. So you're like, it's not that big a deal. But compared to doing nothing, it  is a big deal. You only do it because you like the outcome and you think it's helping you. Or  it is helping you. The patient will get there too, but initially their thought process will be that  it's a hassle. But if they've tried CPAP, oral appliance is super duper easy.  [0:35:35]  So I like people trying CPAP first because it makes it easier to treat them. They are com -  paring oral appliance therapy to CPAP, and I have the extra bonus of I can threaten them  with going back on CPAP. What does that mean? So they come in and they usually aren't  mean to the doctor, at least they never have been to me. So they're going in and the staff  come to me, "Oh, Dr. Spencer, this next patient's really upset about some comfort issues  he's having with his appliances, stuff like that." I'm like, "Okay." So I walk in the room and if  I get just one little millisecond of upsetness or rudeness or anything like that, then I will just  completely just, I'll just say, "Yeah, okay, cool. You know what? Sounds like oral appliance  therapy isn't working for you. Let's get you back on the CPAP." And then they will com -  pletely change their tune. They'll be like, "Whoa, CPAP, what are you talking about, doc? I  just have some comfort issues that I'd like us to address. But if you can't, if that's impossi -  ble, I'll figure it out. I'll work through it. I'm not going back on CPAP. That's not a thing."  [0:36:47]  And then you're like, "Oh, well, wait, you just have some comfort issues? I thought like you  couldn't use oral appliance therapy." "No, it's okay. Compared to CPAP, it's a lot better. It's  just hurting my front tooth a little bit there." "Oh, so if we made it feel better on your front  tooth, everything would be cool?" "Yeah. Oh my gosh, that'd be so freaking amazing."  "Great." Okay. You see what I'm saying there? So we turn the tables on them. If they com -  plain and say, "Well, let's just put you back on CPAP then." That changes their perspective  because they're like, "Oh, no. You don't understand. This is a minor concern that I have.  Maybe I was overly dramatic with your dental assistant that was with me there a minute  ago. I can live with this. I'm not going back on CPAP." Okay. That's the value of people try -  ing CPAP first. Okay. Last patient was found to have sleep apnea or appliance has been  scribed by the medical doctor and they return the patient returns for exam financials and  usually insurance is being pre-approved in advance and stuff like that if you're going to  work with insurance. Okay. So there's our three possible outcomes of somebody who went  to the doctor and got a sleep study.  09/01/25   Page   of 12   15

SSC 2.0 - 202: Referral  The Low Hanging Fruit   [0:37:50]  Low hanging fruit in your practice is people that have already been diagnosed with sleep  apnea already tried CPAP or wouldn't even try it. Okay. That's our low hanging fruit. If you  are new to Spencer Study Club and new to dental sleep medicine, this is where you start.  This is how you pay for all the education that you've gotten so far, your membership in  Spencer Study Club, any equipment that you've bought. You start here. You start by send -  ing out a letter to everyone in your practice, or an email or both, and letting them know,  "Hey, I'm going down this road of some amazing education in the field of obstructive sleep  apnea and the dentist role. You may not know this patient base, but since 2017, dentists  have been asked by the American Dental Association to be screening our patients for what  are called sleep-related breathing disorders, things like sleep apnea and snoring. I am  reaching out now to let you know that we can help you if you have this problem. And if you  have been diagnosed with sleep apnea in the past and tried CPAP but couldn't use it,  would you please call our office? Because your untreated sleep apnea is dangerous and  we want to help you."  [0:39:07]  There you go. You could use exactly what I just said and send that out. And you're going to  have people raise their hand. And you're going to have people that come in for their clean -  ings. They're like, "Hey, I remember I got an email or something about sleep apnea. I was  diagnosed like eight years ago. I didn't do anything. Or I tried that machine for a while, and  it was terrible." That's the low-hanging fruit. And some of these people, as I've discussed  already, you will want to get another sleep study to make sure you know what you're actu -  ally treating. Some of them you won't need to. Some of them you can just call their doctor,  their primary care doctor, by the way. Well, let me not just by the way that. Let me explain  that. So if you had a patient come in and you think you need another sleep study, who  would you call? Their primary care doctor or a sleep doctor. The sleep doctor that they saw  the first time, if they saw one. So it would depend on the scenario there. If they actually  saw the sleep doctor, I would send them back to the sleep doctor. And now, heads up,  sleep doctors will almost always say, "Well, why don't you try CPAP a little better? Why  don't you try a little harder at using the CPAP?" That's all right. It's okay. That's cool. Pri -  mary care doctors, on the other hand, they tend to be less excited about CPAP. Most of  their patients don't use their CPAP, so they live in the real world of people not using that  treatment.  [0:40:27]  And so sometimes you contact the primary care doctor. "Hey, I've got a common patient  here. You're probably aware of this, but was diagnosed with sleep apnea like 10 years  ago. Apparently tried CPAP for a little bit and then gave up. Hasn't done anything for nine  years. He came in. He'd like to try an oral appliance for his snoring and his sleep apnea.  I'm thinking, dude's 10 years older now. I think he said that he's gained some weight. The  odds of this still being mild to moderate sleep apnea are pretty low. What do you think we  09/01/25   Page   of 13   15

SSC 2.0 - 202: Referral  should do though, doc?" Primary care doctors, it might surprise you, but they may be more  likely to just be like, "Yeah, I don't think another sleep study is indicated. We know we have  sleep apnea. So does he probably have worse sleep apnea than 10 years ago?" "Yeah, he  probably does. So what?" "Okay, so you're going to treat him with the oral appliance?  Then do it. And if he's snoring less and feeling better, sounds like it's working. He's not go -  ing to use CPAP anyway. And he's 60 years old, so I'm not sending him for jaw surgery or  whatever. So go for it, dentist, and let's see how it goes."  [0:41:35]  Okay, that's called treating empirically, and primary care doctors do that all the time. So  don't be too surprised when they seemingly cavalier, just like, "Yeah, just treat him and  let's see what happens here." Get him involved, though. So be smart, primary care doctor,  sleep doctor, figure out the outcome that you and the patient are going for, and travel that  trail accordingly. All right, so that is all our screening. We've referred now. The patient's  had a sleep study. They're diagnosed. Everything's ready to rock. And on this too, please  note that I've only talked about using home sleep testing and the company five states  away. When your local area has no resources or it takes forever to get in for a sleep study,  then you might consider working with a primary care doctor and introducing them to the  home sleep testing company five states away. I'm cool with that. I don't like you doing it. I  don't like you having your patient get on the telemedicine with the dude five states away,  and they decide to get a sleep study and it's sent to them in the mail and blah, blah, blah,  blah. I don't like that.  [0:42:51]  Why I don't like that is because that doctor five states away, if you ever have a problem  and you find yourself before the board of dentistry, that sleep doctor is not going to get on  a plane and come to be with you to talk through the case. On the other hand, if you're  working with a primary care doctor, they were using the doctor five states away for the  sleep study stuff, and then there's some issue, the primary care doctor probably would go  with you to the board of dentistry and say, "Hey, board of dentistry, this is my patient. I re -  ferred to Jamison for the oral appliance. He's like a pharmacist in this case. He's just filling  my prescription. What's the problem?" And then they'd be like, "Well, no problem, doctor.  Yeah, we thought that there was a complaint against, Dr. Spencer, and so we had to look  into the complaint, but we understand that Dr. Spencer is filling the prescription for you,  and that that's what he's been instructed to do. That's actually what the American Dental  Association says should be done. Looks good to me."  [0:43:44]  Okay, on the other hand, if it's like, "Oh, Dr. Spencer, you are the one that took it upon you  to do this relationship thing with a doctor five states away and stuff like that, and how did  they do their exam again? So it was on the computer? Like that was it? Telemedicine? Pa -  tient never actually saw the doctor? There's no physical exam done or anything like that?  No labs? No nothing? And you thought that was good? You thought that was good  enough, doctor?" I'd have a way harder. I'd be very uncomfortable in that situation versus  my model of working locally with physicians where, again, knock on wood, never hap -  09/01/25   Page   of 14   15

SSC 2.0 - 202: Referral  pened. Hope it never does happen in my life. Hope it never happens in your life. But if  there ever was an issue, I am quite confident that I could get the local doctors that I work  with to support me in whatever that meant.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 15   15

