SSC 2.0 - 203: Exam & Records  SSC 2.0   Level 2  203: Exam & Records  [intro music]  Exam and Records - My Exam   [0:00:12]  All right, so now we've done all that. We've got our diagnosis, we've got all that. We're  ready to rock and roll with our exam and records. So let me give you an example of my  exam, and this is the way it's done in our Boise practice and our Salt Lake practice. So this  is what Dr. Kuehne would do or Dr. Mangelson would do. We would say something like,  when did you see your dentist last? Well, eight months ago. Any issues? No. Okay. That's  pretty much it, okay?  [0:00:43]  Now, if the answer was, when did you see your dentist last? Oh, I don't have a dentist.  Hmm. Okay, that's going to be really important to us. We need you to be totally checked  out dentally before we anchor something, strap something to your teeth for years and  years. Where do you live? And then they tell me where they live. Hey, we have a good  dentist that we work with there, refers patients to us all the time. They're super duper.  Could we refer you there? Have you get in with them, have a full dental exam, make sure  everything's cool, because the last thing we want to do is fit you with an oral appliance,  because this is going to attach to your teeth. Here it is. This thing attaches to your teeth.  And if you have any periodontal issues or if you have anything that needs like a filling or a  crown or something like that, then that could really screw up the treatment we're doing.  You're not going to be happy. We're not going to be happy. No one's going to be happy. Is  that okay? Okay, so that would be our exam. Does that make sense?  [0:01:38]  Now, your exam would be your regular dental exam. Okay, so why is it that Jamison can  get away with just saying, when was your last dental exam? Who's your dentist? Stuff like  that. And you can't. Well, because we don't need to do perio probing and all that kind of  stuff because we don't do that type of stuff. All of our patients have a dentist. Okay, if this is  your patient, then your dental exam that you normally do is your dental exam. You don't  need to do anything really special for sleep apnea. I'll go over some stuff with the jaw joints  and stuff like that that you probably don't do. But frankly, as you learn those things, you  should start doing those anyway. You should be doing those on every patient. You should  be, I don't think that there's necessarily a exam for one person and not another person.  You know, there kind of is. But once you understand jaw problems and things like that,  you're going to be screening everybody for this.  09/01/25   Page   of 1   10

SSC 2.0 - 203: Exam & Records  Exam from External Marketing   [0:02:41]  Now, your exam, if you get your patients from external marketing, is going to need to be  the world's greatest dental exam. Okay, let me explain that a little bit. If it's your patient,  you just do your normal exam. And you're comfortable with whatever you need to get. And  if that's perio probing and a Pano, and if you want a Cone Beam CT and a range of motion  and palpations of the muscles and the joints and all that kind of stuff, great. You do you.  However, if you are getting your patients from Facebook ads or a billboard or radio ads,  that patient likely has a dentist.  [0:03:33]  And when you treat that patient with oral appliance therapy, and then they don't follow your  guidance, and they don't use their morning reprogrammer, and they don't do their exercis -  es, and they don't floss like a boss and check their bite every night, and so they develop a  posterior open bite, what is their dentist, their dentist, likely to say? If you're thinking to  yourself, well, they're likely to say, hey, that appliance that so-and-so across town fits you  with has screwed up your bite, has intruded your teeth, has caused you to have a TMJ  problem, you should really, really think about getting a lawyer and suing them. That's what  they're going to say. So don't be lured into, okay, I'm getting my patients from Facebook. I  can do a relatively comprehensive exam that I'm comfortable with. No, you're going to  want this to be the world's greatest exam because you're going to want to check every  tooth with Shimstock, the occlusion with every tooth with the Shimstock. You're going to  want to floss between all the teeth and check for contacts. You're going to want to docu -  ment any bite issues. You're going to want to document everything possible because if  there's ever a problem down the road, their real dentist is going to blame it on you and oral  appliance therapy. Does that make sense? I hope that makes sense to you.  [0:05:00]  So it's all about where these patients are coming from. If you are their dentist, then we're  cool. If you have a practice like mine now or eventually, then literally your dental exam can  be as efficient as, when did you see your dentist last? And that's it. And if they haven't had  a dentist, then in my opinion, and you don't have to do this, but I think you'd be smart to do  this, we won't treat a patient unless they have a dentist because that's a big part of the  equation here, right? For them to have long-term success and good outcomes, I want to  make sure that they are dentally healthy. And I am not a real dentist in that sense. We're  not following up with people like that. So I want them under the care of a real dentist who's  going to be keeping track of all of that.  [0:05:45]  And by the way, this makes you more popular in your community if you're working with the  local dental community and speaking to the local dental community and things like that.  This is another reason why, again, knock on wood, I've never been sued, I've never had  09/01/25   Page   of 2   10

SSC 2.0 - 203: Exam & Records  any problems like that. Because dentists in the communities where we have practices  don't tend to say, oh yeah, that oral appliance has screwed up your bite, moved your teeth,  done all this sorts of stuff, you should sue them. They may say, yeah, actually it looks like  your bite's changed with use of that oral appliance that you're using for your sleep apnea,  but we know the Center for Sleep Apnea, those are good guys, so give them a call, they'll  get you in, they'll see what's going on. That's how it works.  Things You Might Consider   [0:06:25]  Okay, all right, so here's some things that you might consider as part of your clinical exam -  ination, and this is above and beyond what you just feel is a good exam. Okay, so again,  you're not going to see on here perio probing and stuff like that, because that's just kind of  part of a normal dental exam. I don't need to teach you how to do that. That's up to you.  But I think you come together with the things that are important to you and do those things,  unless you're getting your patients from marketing, in which case you need to do the  world's greatest exam, you need to figure out everything that you could possibly check and  do.  Pano or FMX or Cone Bream CT   [0:07:03]  All right, so Pano or full mouth series or Cone Beam CT. So in our practice, we get kind of  uncomfortable treating someone without a Cone Beam CT. I've treated hundreds, if not  thousands of patients, with just a Pano, but we don't like it. We want to treat them with a  Cone Beam CT because we're able to see everything in 3D, see their jaw joints, see their  airway, things like that. And quick story on that as a way to kind of sell people on a Cone  Beam CT, so to speak, is we had a patient once, and you can use the same story, even if  you haven't had a patient that had the same problem, you can use my story. So we had a  patient, she was an 18 year old girl, and she was off at college and she started basically  failing out because she couldn't get up in the mornings, she couldn't make her morning  classes, she was having trouble studying. And her parents thought that she was just out  partying and that's why she was failing out and stuff like that.  [0:08:03]  And she's like, no, mom and dad, I'm not doing those things. I'm just really tired all the time  and having a hard time. So they get her in for a sleep study and find out that she has sleep  apnea. Well, she's an 18 year old girl, so she's not super stoked about going on CPAP.  The sleep doctor sends her to us and we treat her with oral appliance therapy. But as part  of our examination, we get a Cone Beam CT. Well, lo and behold, we see this mass on her  tongue, the back of her tongue. And sleep doctors don't usually even do open your mouth  09/01/25   Page   of 3   10

SSC 2.0 - 203: Exam & Records  and say, ah, on their examination. Some do, but most don't. And even if they did, they  wouldn't stick a mirror down the throat. They would only look for Mallampati, right?  [0:08:50]  So this was missed on this girl. Nobody saw it. I'm not positive we would have picked it up  on a Pano. Probably if we're really good, we would have. I'm not sure we're that good on  Panos. So I'm not sure we would have picked it up on a Pano. Her previous dentist or her  current dentist, rather, had not noticed anything on a Pano. But we picked it up on the  Cone Beam CT. And we believe in having our Cone Beam CTs read by a radiologist. We  use a medical radiologist. If you're not doing that, I strongly encourage you to do that. Den -  tal Ray is the company that we work with and endorse. My Boise practice actually works  with a friend of mine and have so for over 10 years. Dental Ray is a medical radiology  company, very affordable for these reads. If you want a much more thorough dental style  reading, then you can use BeamReaders, they do a great job. It's more expensive, but the  report is extremely thorough.  [0:09:44]  So bottom line, we have this read. The radiologist comes back and says, yeah, that's a  base of the tongue tumor. That needs to be biopsied and see what the heck's going on.  She gets in, has a biopsy. Good news. It's benign, but it's obstructing her airway, okay?  Well, she didn't have time to be out of school to recover from the surgery because it would  take a little bit of recovery time. So she wore the oral appliance for a few months until she  was out of school for summer. And then she was able to go in, have that base of the  tongue tumor removed, and she didn't have sleep apnea anymore. That was it. Cured her.  [0:10:55]  Now, I can't tell you that that's happened hundreds of times. I can tell you it's happened  that once. But on the other hand, through Spencer Study Club, I've had one dentist in par -  ticular. I won't say where because then you'll never want to go to this state or visit there.  But she's picked up five tumors so far. And she's only really been doing this heavily since  about 2019 that she's had a limited practice. And five tumors that she's picked up. And a  couple of them were cancerous tumors. So not cool. Now, we haven't. And we have them  read, too, like I said. But that'd be a super drag, right?  [0:11:16]  If you just treated somebody based on a Pano and you missed something and then later  it's diagnosed. And it's like, well, gosh, if only I would have got that Cone Beam CT. So I'm  a big fan of the Cone Beam CT. Cameron and I have had a   Cone Beam CT for years and  years and years. I had it before actually Cameron joined my practice, bought my first one  with a prosthodontist in Boise. We were, I think, the first ones in the Boise area to have a  Cone Beam CT. It cost us like $300,000 and we had to like have the special drywalling of  the room and radiation-proof glass and all sorts of crud that we had to do to get that put in.  Nowadays, much easier to do this, much, much, much, much less expensive to get a  Cone Beam. Get a   Cone Beam, strongly recommend it.  [0:12:03]  09/01/25   Page   of 4   10

SSC 2.0 - 203: Exam & Records  However, if you don't have one now, that doesn't mean you've got to wait to get a Cone  Beam to start seeing people. Just get the x-rays that you're comfortable with. I would, for  sure, get a Pano and a full mouth series so that you can kind of do a thorough dental  exam there with the jaw joints being part of it. And if you see some funkiness going on on  the Pano and the jaw joint, then get them, send them to your local oral surgeon that has a  Cone Beam CT, your local orthodontist has a Cone Beam CT, get a Cone Beam CT so  that you can see in 3D what's going on.  Range of Motion   [0:12:34]  Okay, range of motion, you can go back to the level one with the TMD video there and re -  mind yourself of these normals and things like that. But maximum opening should be 48 to  52 or the three fingers. I remember their fingers, not your fingers. Lateral is about 8 to 12  millimeters either way, protrusive 4 to 10 millimeters. Lateral and protrusive, don't get too  worked up about this. Because I'll have people like, oh man, I got this patient and they  could only move three millimeters laterally. And then I'll ask, could they open normal? And  they'll be like, yeah. Okay, so there's no one that can open fully like that and can't go more  than a couple of millimeters sideways. How come?  [0:13:21]  Well, because to open wide requires lateral pterygoids unless you're a bilateral joint re -  placement surgery patient, then opening is gravity and some of your suprahyoid muscles  and they're not going to open wide. So somebody who doesn't have lateral pterygoids is  not gonna be able to move their jaw and they're not gonna be able to protrude their jaw.  People with lateral pterygoids that can't seemingly do that but they can open wide, that's  because they know how to open wide. Okay, they've done it before. They've yawned,  they've thrown up, they've opened big. Maybe recently, they took a big bite of an apple or  whatever. People know how to do this. No one ever until you has said move your jaw to  the side and to the other side and then bring it forward.  [0:14:10]  Okay, when you ask them bring their jaw forward, they say, which jaw? And you're like, I'm  pretty sure you can only move the lower one, not the upper one. But the point is they have  no clue what they're doing, right? I mean, that'd be like judging somebody. It's like, all right,  I want you to do the lotus pose. Do a crow pose for me for yoga. And I'm gonna see if you  have normal flexibility and stuff if you can do that or not. They're like, I don't know what the  flip you're talking about. I've never done that before. Now, it's not that they can't do that.  They just might need a little bit of coaching to know how to do that. So don't get worked up  about the lateral and the protrusive. And you might need to help them with a little guidance  on their chin and stuff to help them know what you're trying to get them to do, okay, don't  get worked up about it. There's not any appliance on the market. Like if you're gonna ask  me, yeah, Jamison, this person only has four millimeters of lateral motion. Which appli -  09/01/25   Page   of 5   10

SSC 2.0 - 203: Exam & Records  ance should I use? So that's not... I've never told you that that's something you need to be  looking into on appliance choice is how much they can move their jaw in any direction.  Joint Noises, Overjet, Overbite and Midline Deviation   [0:15:18]  Joint noises, overjet, overbite, midline deviation. This is important because if they have a  really deep overbite, then you want an appliance that you can have minimum vertical be -  tween those incisors because otherwise you're gonna have to open up half a mile in the  back. So that is important. Midline deviation is important because when you take your bite  record, if their jaw is off to the side a bit and you need to be looking at, well, is that normal?  Is that where their jaw normally is? Or was that induced? Was that accidental? Did the pa -  tient bring their jaw to the side? On the protrusive, so back to protrusive a little bit here. I  said I don't get too worked up about it. But if they protrude and deflect, or if they open and  deflect too, then I make the appliance to their deflection.  [0:16:10]  There's some people over the years that have taught to try to correct the midline. Not a fan  of that. Why I'm not a fan of that is because probably they have a deflection because they  are stuck on one side. So they have a disc out of place, probably, not for sure. We don't  know for sure yet. We'd have to get an MRI to know for sure, but we can assume. And  then you ask their history, your job or pop and click. Oh yeah, it popped and clicked a lot  after I got my braces off. You ever remember it kind of catching on you? Oh yeah, in col -  lege it used to catch on me a little bit. How long have you been squashing Subway sand -  wiches? About 20 years. Okay, that's a non-reducing displacement history. We've talked  about that before. If they deflect on opening, which means they'll deflect on protrusion,  take your bite record on that deflection because that's the way their jaw goes, okay?  [0:16:59]  And you can always swing around if you need to. I would probably, in that case too, think  about the appliance choice and an anterior pull push is going to let the jaw come forward.  Anyway, it wants to come forward. So that could be an advantage. A pull appliance and a  push appliance, you can bring the jaw forward asymmetrically if you want to. You don't  have to bring them forward exactly the same on both sides. You can bring one side for -  ward more than the other. So just keep that in mind and think that through with the other  decisions that you're making with appliance choice. Joint noises, crepitus, none right, left  bilateral popping, mild, moderate, severe, reduces in centric relation, okay?  [0:17:44]  So on the quality of the popping, mild, moderate, severe, that's up to you. Now remember  though that the opposite is usually true when it comes to popping, right? So a really loud  pop, is that bad or good? Remember with TMD stuff, take whatever you think is obvious,  flip it 180, and then you'll probably be right. So a really loud pop would be good. So you  might say that's mild. And then just in case some other dentist is looking at your records  09/01/25   Page   of 6   10

SSC 2.0 - 203: Exam & Records  one day, you might put in the side there or in your notes, mild pop, or you might even de -  fine mild pop somewhere in your records there, but you could say a patient has a very loud  and distinct early opening click. That would be a mild because it's early, it's not as pro -  gressed, okay? Moderate would be maybe a little later opening click, not quite as pro -  nounced. Severe would be a late opening click that you can barely palpate anymore.  [0:19:00]  Now again, only those of us who know this, so that's very few of us, are going to under -  stand what the flip you're talking about there. So just make sure that mild, moderate, se -  vere means something to you. That's the key is the mild, moderate, severe means some -  thing to you. Not to Jamison   Spencer, it's to you. What does that mean to me so that you  can then down the road, if the person starts to have popping or clicking or just becomes  different in some way, you can go back and look at your records and go, okay, our base -  line records, I had that you had a moderate disc displacement, moderate popping and  clicking the jaw, which means to me, okay, and then you would know what that means to  you, right?  Reduces in Centric Relation   [0:19:43]  Reduces in centric   relation, this is where we bring the jaw into a different position, have  them open and close, so an anterior position, usually edge to edge if they are people with  a normal occlusion, and you're going to see if the clicking goes away. So that's called re -  ducing, reducing means going back into normal anatomical position. So we bring the jaw  into a different position, open, close, open, close, open, close, and it shouldn't click any -  more if it's reduced. Okay, why is that important? Well, that's important because the oral  appliance that they're going to wear is pretty much for sure going to keep them on the disc  all night long.  [0:20:24]  Okay, does that make sense, right? Because we're going to put in the appliance and  they're going to have to open big, ah, you stick the thing in their mouth, they close their  teeth into it in a protruded position, they're on the disc. Okay, so historically, they were  mostly off the disc. People with a clicking joint are off the disc all the time, except when  they open and it goes pop. Now, for the first time in a long time, they're going to be on that  disc as long as they wear their appliance. So that could be six hours, seven hours, eight  hours a day, from basically almost zero a day before. Why does that matter? Well, be -  cause it could make it more likely for them to have a posterior open bite develop because  their joint is in a better position all night long, and then they have to literally dislocate their  jaw, dislocate that disc in order to get their teeth to touch again.  [0:21:17]  Okay, so super important, make sure that you have the TMJ tutor, TMJ demonstrator in  order to show this. Okay, periodontal condition, up to you what all you do with that. Check  09/01/25   Page   of 7   10

SSC 2.0 - 203: Exam & Records  their Mallampati. Now, this matters sort of. So somebody with... It doesn't matter for appli -  ance selection, I don't think. But if they have a type three or four, class three or four Mal -  lampati, so you can't see down the throat at all, that's a person that's more likely to, or it's  going to be more difficult to take care of their snoring. And so you might want to point that  out upfront, right? It's like, dang, you've got, and show them pictures and say, this is class  one, this is class two, you're a class four, I can't see down your throat at all. And that tissue  back there is really close proximity to your tongue, and so it's going to be really easy for it  to, throughout the night. And even if I bring your jaw forward, you've got a lot of redundant  tissue there, and so that may be a problem. Now, if you are doing a snorlase type of pro -  cedure or something like that, then that'd be great because you can point that out. Hey, we  can try just with the oral appliance and see how you do here.  [0:22:36]  But we also have a procedure where we could do a little laser procedure of your palate,  and that's going to firm up those tissues. They're going to pull them up a little bit, make it  so that I can more easily see down your throat, and you don't care about that. What you  care about is, it's going to reduce the snoring, okay? So that is a good reason to do the  Mallampati. The reason I kind of go on on this for a second is, sometimes there's soft -  wares out there, you might be using them now. So you're going to notice on my form here  that neck circumference is not on here. And I bet if you're using somebody's software that  it is. And those things sort of annoy me because there's nothing about neck circumference,  there's nothing about BMI, there's nothing about things like that that make a difference with  oral appliance therapy. There's never been a study that's like, yeah, if they've got an 18-  inch neck, you need to use a Herbst appliance. That doesn't exist. Those are in those oth -  er things because they're using them kind of for screening. But at this point in the game,  we know they have sleep apnea.  [0:23:40]  So I'm not asking the Mallampati   or looking at the Mallampati   to decide if they have sleep  apnea or not. We know they have sleep apnea. You're looking at the Mallampati   to decide  if you need to discuss with them something about their treatment. Does that make sense?  So this is different than screening. Screening when we're looking at the Mallampati, we are  saying, hey, that's a check in that you might have sleep apnea column. During our exami -  nation, Mallampati   is a, hey, that's a check in you might need a trip to the ear, nose and  throat doctor to do a little fine tuning on your palate there to completely get rid of the snor -  ing. This may not be about your mandible completely. Or you might need me to do that lit -  tle laser thing, okay> Because a lot of ENTs aren't doing that anymore or at all.  Occlusion   [0:24:24]  All right, occlusion. Class 2, either division 1 or 2. Why we're looking at this stuff is be -  cause that will make a difference with our appliance selection. If they have a class 2 div 2,  09/01/25   Page   of 8   10

SSC 2.0 - 203: Exam & Records  deep overbite, we don't have a lot of room. We don't want to open them up really big in the  back. If they're class 3, then that doesn't necessarily change our appliance. But we do  know that it's going to be a little trickier to teach them to get their jaw back in the morning.  So that's just kind of an indicator there. Plus, we want to document that stuff of where they  were. Lest someone come along later and be like, yeah, this person was class 1 until they  start wearing that oral appliance and now they're class 3. And you're like, no, they were  class 3 when I first started seeing them. Here's the records.  Missing Teeth   [0:25:10]  Missing teeth, of course, is going to be part of our valuation for the appliance. If they're  missing lower posterior teeth, you're not using a pull appliance, okay? Back to the perio, if  they have periodontally compromised teeth, you might not be able to use an appliance at  all. Okay, we just had a patient today on Spencer Study Club. A dentist posted a Pano and  this person had very severe bone loss and they're like, hey, oral appliance indicated in this  case. And my reply wasn't yes or no. My reply was, have they tried CPAP first? Have they  already failed CPAP? Because that's going to make a difference, right? Like, well, treat my  problem or not treat my problem. I've already tried CPAP. I've given up on CPAP. Okay, it's  oral appliance therapy or Inspire or Trake. Trake always works, right? Remember that.  What are my options? And the patient may be like, well, I could do that, but that could ex -  acerbate my periodontal disease, make it worse faster. I don't want to do that. Okay, so  that's why we're doing all this.  Epworth   [0:26:16]  Epworth, the Epworth sleepiness scale is also for us at this point. So I called it the worth -  lessness scale before, right? And remember, we're not in screening mode anymore. Now  we're in treatment mode. So who cares about the Epworth? Well, we do now, right? And  we want the patient filling it out as a sleepiness scale. How likely are you to be sleepy, fa -  tigued in these situations? Not necessarily a doziness scale like it's written, but you want  them to give you a true sleepiness, I'm sleepy, scale. And as I'll show you on the follow-up  form here in a bit, we do this with every patient every time. So we are using that Epworth  sleepiness scale as an objective measure of how are they feeling because they're filling  that out every time. And if their score goes from 16 to 14 to 12 to 9 to 8 to 6, that's our  goal. We want to see that getting smaller over time, okay? And you could just ask stuff like,  how sleepy are you, 0 to 10? And that'd be okay too. But the Epworth sleepiness scale is  going to be something that your doctors are going to be familiar with. So it's just an easy  thing to use for that objective measurement, okay?  09/01/25   Page   of 9   10

SSC 2.0 - 203: Exam & Records  Joint videos - Explanation of Joint Noises   [0:27:29]  [video playback]  Okay, you've all seen the joint videos many, many times, so I won't belabor the point here.  We can go back into level one for us to talk more about this if you still aren't quite 100%  comfortable with what's going on in the normal joint, reducing disc displacement, non-re -  ducing disc displacement, and the generic joint disease. As you know, I'm going to come  back to this over and over and over again. Most dentists do not understand this. Most den -  tal professionals do not understand this. And virtually, no patients understand this unless  you use something like this. There was someone I was talking to the other day, and they  were kind of debating me a little bit on using the TMJ demonstrator, and they're like, yeah,  I have a hard time kind of showing the disc displacement and I'm like, well, then get better  at it, because your patients have no idea what you're doing. Well, I've got some pictures  and stuff. I'm like, it's not the same thing. And most people, you can't show them these  videos here because they'll pass out. They'll think that that's super gross. And especially if  you mention, oh, by the way, these are cadavers, then they're going to hit the deck, okay?  [0:28:38]  Remember that story that I had Boy Scouts I showed these videos to, and one of them lit -  erally passed out. So I don't recommend that you show these videos unless the patient is  a nurse or has some sort of medical background and would be super geeked out on this  sort of stuff. That's fine. But everyone else, you need to use the TMJ demonstrator, which  is flipping awesome.  TMJ Demonstrator   [0:28:59]  So the TMJ demonstrator, you want to get this and be very comfortable with it, get practice  with it, take it with you, show your family, explain everything that goes on. But we show  them the normal joint. We show them a disk displacement case. So here we have the disk  out of place, out of place when the teeth are in occlusion. So that's what you're showing  here is the disk is anteriorly displaced when the teeth are in occlusion. So when their teeth  are together, their joint is dislocated. And then with the oral appliance that you're going to  use for their sleep apnea, this is going to line up their joint, okay? And then the problem is  that when they take that splint out in the morning, their bite's going to be off. And in order  to get their teeth to touch again, they're going to need to dislocate their jaw joint, okay?  Get really, really good at that, because that's super duper important.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 10   10

