SSC 2.0 - 204: Custom Appliance Selection & Bite Registration  SSC 2.0   Level 2  204: Custom Appliance Selection & Bite  Registration  [intro music]  Custom Appliance Selection - Types of Appliance   [0:00:12]  So you've done your examination. You're ready to go to the next step. Next step is going to  be custom appliance selection. And for here, I'm going to send you back to Level 1 and go  through all of the things that I explained there to consider, all the different considerations.  Okay, desire to keep their mouth closed, desire to, the ability to open their mouth, how far  they have to travel, if they have lateral wear, so evidence of lateral bruxism, if they're miss -  ing teeth, if they've had experience with an appliance before, all those different things.  Please do me a favor, go back. If you're not super duper comfortable with that, go back to  that level and refresh your memory. But you will recall from that level that I have basically  five mechanisms of action, and these are the different mechanisms of action. What's the  one best appliance? The one they'll use, right? So it's the one the patient will actually  wear.  [0:01:07]  The art of this field is you getting good enough with figuring out what this patient will really  use, and that being the appliance that you select. And again, be careful with this because  dentists will tend to look at things different than patients and you may look at an appliance  and go, oh, wow, this has metal on it, and it's got, it's got ball clasps and framework and  whatever. This appliance seems really robust, or this one's got these fun bands, or what -  ever it is that you think. Super, but I'm not sure that the patient's going to think the same  way you are. What will influence the patient appropriately so is for you to educate them. So  I was just talking to a lab owner a little bit ago, and we talked about this. So some of the  newer appliances, like this one here, as I'm recording this, we're in the very cutting edge of  printing appliances in-house, and hopefully by the time you see this and stuff, this will be  fairly common, I hope. But right now we're pretty cutting edge on this stuff. And we were  talking about that that some people equate weight with quality. It kind of weighs a lot, and  that's a quality thing. And I'm like, well, yeah, they do, unless they don't. And then the  analogy I used was this guy that I was talking to as a mountain biker like I am.  [0:02:43]  And I said, "I'm about to spend serious money on a mountain bike, and part of the reason  it costs so much is all the components on it are super-duper light." So, like, if I went to  Walmart and got a mountain bike, it would probably weigh 40-plus pounds, and the bikes  09/01/25   Page   of 1   12

SSC 2.0 - 204: Custom Appliance Selection & Bite Registration  I'm looking at will weigh 22, 23 pounds. And that's a big difference. And the difference in  price is a really big difference. So to get something made out of titanium versus stainless  steel versus steel is a big difference. So with oral appliance therapy, some of the value  equation is what you can help the patient understand. And maybe you have them hold a  Herbst-style appliance versus a nylon EMA, for example, and there would be a pretty sig -  nificant weight difference. You could even measure them if you wanted. This one is this  many ounces or this many grams, and this one is this many grams. And that didn't sound  like much, patient, until you put it in your mouth. So what you want is an appliance that  disappears. You want something that you put in your mouth and you don't even know it's  there.  [0:03:55]  So the smaller, thinner, lighter, the better, there you go. You just helped the person to un -  derstand that thin, lightweight, that is better than big and bulky, so go back to level one,  refresh your memory on this if you need to. But bottom line you're going to choose an ap -  pliance that you think that the patient's going to actually use. And remember, too, that if  they're an engineer, you're going to have them choose their own appliance because then  that's the one they'll actually use. But for everybody else, you're going to kind of choose  the one that you think they're going to use. If you're playing the insurance game, then  sometimes that's dictated to you by insurance. That sucks because now it's like about giv -  ing them an appliance that they may not use. And as I will argue with the insurance com -  panies, the most expensive treatment they can possibly pay for is the one that the patient  won't use. They don't seem to care about that, so they will oftentimes dictate what you can  use, and then you then there too, you can say, "Hey patient, your insurance is only going  to pay for this one here that looks kind of like a bear trap.  [0:05:01]  I’ve found a lot of patients won't even use it. So you could, if you wanted to, go outside of  your insurance and they pay for this appliance here, which I find that my patients actually  wear. So what do you want? You want it covered by insurance? You want to actually use  it?" And then they can say, "Well I'd like it covered by my insurance. I'll give it the old col -  lege try, see if I can do it, and then if I can't tolerate the metal bars in my cheek or some -  thing, then could I do this other appliance afterwards?" "Sure, you could," That's the art.  The art is figuring out what will they actually wear.  Role of Oral Appliance Therapy in Obstructive Sleep Apnea   [0:05:31]  Now, I throw this study in here, and this is not a heavy study type of level, but I throw this  in here just as something for you to have and to have the reference so that when you are  meeting new primary care doctors that we talked about, that this might be something that  you print in its entirety, and you can go to the Spencer Study Club library, and we have  09/01/25   Page   of 2   12

SSC 2.0 - 204: Custom Appliance Selection & Bite Registration  these articles typically, not 100% of the time, but most articles that we reference in  Spencer Study Club, we have the full-text articles on Spencer Study Club.  [0:06:10]  And this would be a great thing for you to literally print and take with you, and this is a long  article, if I remember correctly, and this is going through these different guidelines and tak -  ing, so National Institutes of Clinical Excellence 2021 guidelines in conjunction with the  American Academy of Sleep Medicine and Academy of Dental Sleep Medicine, and taking  all of this data and saying, "Hey, oral appliance therapy works, and it's pretty good," That  might be something that you can, again, you just throw it on their desk. The Academy of  Sleep Medicine, Academy of Dental Sleep Medicine guidelines from 2015 are like 56  pages long, and I would take that as soon as that was published, I would routinely take  that to doctor's offices and basically just print it and print it one-sided, by the way, and so  I'd have this big thick thing of paper, and then I would just drop it on their desk like, boom,  like here's the weight of the evidence, literally.  [0:07:09]  And I'd be surprised if more than one or two of those doctors even picked it up and flipped  through it, but they realized that this was not just some fly-by-night thing that I'm doing, this  is real, has a lot of evidence, has a lot of support behind it, you should take this seriously,  so that's why I throw this in here, is not to try to prove to you that oral appliance therapy is  cool, I think you know that already, I hope, but to give you a reference that is a little newer,  so like I said, the ADSM, AASM guidelines, the kind of original big ones were 2015, so  they're getting a little long in the tooth as far as research is concerned, this one, 2023,  that's going to be around for a while. ADSM has guidelines that are newer, ADSM split  from the AASM, so actually those 2015 guidelines are possibly a little bit more potent be -  cause of that medical connection, a medical doctor looking at something that says dental  sleep medicine on it, they may be like, "Whatever, you guys would say that, that's your  field," whereas if it's like this one from European Respiratory Journal and stuff like that,  that's going to have a little bit more weight for your average physician.  Informed Consent   [0:08:24]  Okay, now what? Well, let's get informed consent. So this is where we're going over the  potential side effects that they're going to have, we're going to talk about world's greatest  flosser, we're going to talk about check your bite every night, we're going to go back and  remind them of the morning reprogrammer, we're going to make that at this point, if that's  what you do, you might do it at the fitting, but we're going to remind them of all of these  things now and have them sign that informed consent before we move forward.  Bite Registration   [0:08:56]  09/01/25   Page   of 3   12

SSC 2.0 - 204: Custom Appliance Selection & Bite Registration  So our next step is bite registration, where are we going to start this patient? And so I  recorded a YouTube video a long time ago, and I think we'll go ahead and put this in here  now so that you can watch that, and then I'll kind of give you a little bit of the update on  that, but let's go ahead and put it in here and you can watch that.  [0:09:20]  [video playback]  Hello, Jamison Spencer here, going to shoot a quick video on how to use the George  Gauge. Now I've shot a bunch of videos over the years on how to do George Gauges, you  may remember one from about a decade ago where I had a heck of a lot longer hair. If you  have seen that one recently, just disregard most of that, not all of it, some of it's still true. I  did a video a few years ago with a little shorter hair, and now I'm making another video all  with the George Gauge, what the heck. So how I've used the George Gauge over the  years has changed a little bit, and so I think I've got it more refined now and more pre -  dictable, which I've learned mostly through mentoring a lot of dentists and helping them  with these bite registrations and getting consistent results from the labs. So let me show  you how to use the George Gauge.  [0:10:09]  First I better put on some gloves so I don't get any Jenny's icky spit on me. Wife spit, you  don't want that on you, right? I bet you dentists out there too, you probably wear gloves  when you work on your wife so you don't just... Anyway, so we're going to open this box  here, this is the George Gauge. I hear that box opening videos are very popular on You -  Tube, so I thought we'd do one. Okay, we've got our instructions here, you can pretty much  throw that away as far as I'm concerned. Here is the handle, and this is the handle. Now  this is not heat sterilized, so it will melt it, so it's cold sterilized and you've got to keep this.  The forks come in the package, we have gray forks and white forks. The white forks are 5  millimeters entrance size opening, the gray forks are 2, and they have kind of a wide arch  and then one that is more kind of a standard or more narrow arch.  [0:11:08]  I'll go ahead and just, we'll use the white ones. Now, I used to say, so one of the changes  that I've made over the years is I used to say that you use the white one all the time except  in deep overbite cases and then you'd use the gray one. Now the white fork again is 5 mil -  limeters interincisal, the gray is 2, but I've changed that. So now I virtually never use the  white fork except in people with an anterior open bite and that's because with the 2 mil -  limeter they will not even get their teeth to touch it. So I use this now an anterior open bite  pretty much only and the 2 millimeter all the rest of the time. Now the reason that is, is I  like the appliances to be made at a minimal vertical, a minimal VDO and that minimal ver -  tical is basically going to be set based on the appliance design.  [0:12:02]  So some appliances need 5 or 6 or 7 in the front because that's where the mechanism is.  Others can be lower in the front, but my concern with using the 5 is nobody, their teeth vir -  tually never go into that little notch. Their teeth get hung up here and so we end up being  09/01/25   Page   of 4   12

SSC 2.0 - 204: Custom Appliance Selection & Bite Registration  7, 8, 9 millimeters open in the front and that may be too much vertical opening and you  could have gotten away with a lower vertical opening. I like the VDO on the appliance to  be minimal and then we can always add more vertical. For most of the appliances, reduc -  ing vertical is challenging. Adding vertical is far easier. Now the big caveat to what I just  said would be if you're using a monoblock, an adjustable monoblock type of an appliance  like the Moses, the PM Positioner, the Klearway, something like that where your vertical is  basically impossible to change once that appliance has been fabricated. You would need  to basically start over. So in those appliances, you want to make sure that your vertical and  your starting AP are right where you want them.  [0:13:08]  For most of the other type of designs, your anterior anti-pull appliance, your push appli -  ance like Herbst, pull appliances like EMAs and narwhal's, your interlocking appliances  like SomnoMed, dorsals, things like that, you can get away with having an initial minimal  vertical. Alright, so back to our George Gauge, we have this little blue piece and we can  loosen this up and the blue piece is going to open, slide and open and close here and this  is to give us room for the lower incisors. So for most people, we're going to have that open  just basically the width of their incisor. So I'll open that up just a titch. Now look at Jenny's  teeth and her teeth, go and open a little bit, open. Her teeth are straight. She has a lingual  bar from a retainer or for a retainer and so I'm going to just put this over and make sure  that her incisal edges touch the blue and it doesn't flex it. So that's the thing you're going  to do there. Now once you've done that, you've actually changed these markings a little bit  and as I'll show in a second, I couldn't care less about the markings anyway.  [0:14:14]  Now this is unique to me, so most people that you hear talk about the George Gauge,  they're going to say things like 70% maximum intrusion, 60% maximum intrusion, stuff like  that. I never talk about that, couldn't care less about that. The reason I couldn't care less  about that is the appliances nowadays are so adjustable. We have so much ability to ad -  just the appliance that I want to start patients at comfortably protruded and then we can  move forward from there. I don't think it's necessary to start people at 70% or 80% of their  ability to come forward. We just don't need to do that most of the time so we can start  them in a more comfortable position and I find a lot of patients, particularly younger, thin -  ner patients, are going to do fine in a very comfortable position. It's not about jacking their  jaw forward, it's more about keeping their jaw from falling backwards. So now that we've  got the blue thing set, we can slide in the top part and I'm going to leave that loose so it  can move back and forth. So I'm not going to tighten down this screw just yet. I'm going to  let it so it can go back and forth.  [0:15:16]  So I put this in, close down, and then have Jenny move forward and backwards and for -  ward and backwards and now just bring your jaw comfortably forward. And I kind of screw  that down, and then I'm going to look at her teeth, and she is basically end-to-end. Basical -  ly end-to-end. Now, another thing we could do here is, open for me, is I could have her  make a snoring noise in the back of her throat. Go ahead and do that. And then open, and  09/01/25   Page   of 5   12

SSC 2.0 - 204: Custom Appliance Selection & Bite Registration  close, and make that same noise there. And it's very difficult for her to make the noise in  that position. So I'll sometimes do that with the patient just as a bit of a psychological, "Oh,  I get it. I bring my jaw forward, and it's harder to make that noise." And they will relate to  that. Now, I mentioned the word comfortably protruded. So comfortably protruded is for two  people, for the patient and me. So let's say, open for me, and close. And I told Jenny to  take her jaw forward, and backwards, and forward, and now take it forward comfortably for  you, and just exaggerate and go way far forward. And she says, "Well, that's comfortable."  And I look, and she is way forward. I would say, "You know what? That seems a little ag -  gressive."  [0:16:29]  So I just saw, I didn't measure it. You can. You can mark down how far forward, how far  back. You can do all that. That's fine with me. But I just saw how far forward she moved.  And at that point, she's at about, I just said, I'll never use this phrase, but she's about 80%  to 90% of her maximum protrusion of what she just did. Just did that minute. Is that really  her maximum? Probably not. But it's just that moment is what she did. So I would look at  that, say, "That's a little bit aggressive. Go ahead and relax your jaw back a little bit." And  say, "How does that feel?" "Feels fine." And then she's back to end to end. So that's how I  find my initial position, is I want it comfortable for the patient and me. So it's comfortably  protruded for two people, the patient and you. Then you know you're at the spot. Once  you're at the spot there, then it's pretty straightforward. We're going to get our blue bite or  whatever bite registration material you want to use. Load up this fork. I find that using the  super fast set is too fast. So typically fast set is ideal.  [0:17:34]  Super fast is too fast. Put this in, close down. I watched to see when she closed. There  was nothing getting in her way. We didn't move her jaw to one side or the other. And this  will just take a few seconds to set up here. The fork itself makes it so that there's no way  that her jaw can shift backwards or forwards because of how the fork is designed. By the  way, there are a lot of different systems out there that you can use. There's the ProGauge.  There's the Airway Metrics gauges. And I'll show you a way to do this in a second too. If  you're super cheap and don't want to buy any of this stuff, there's a way to take this bite  registration too. Because really what we're doing is we just want a position with the jaw a  little forward, kind of down that articular eminence. We want to capture that for our starting  position. And then that makes adjusting the appliance easier from there. Let me see.  Good. Okay, we're set. Open for me.  [0:18:29]  All right. Now the last step, which is critical, I believe, is we take this off. Now the fork is  what's going to go to the lab. But the little critical bit here is I like to put this back in the  mouth and then have the patient close and open and close and open and close and open.  And you can see, go ahead and keep doing that, that Jenny does not deflect. She just  opens and closes right to that spot. Open for me. That's critical. If you see the patient  without the handle, so the handle, because of this blue part here, it can deflect the jaw one  way or the other. So take the handle off, have just the fork, and have them try that in and  09/01/25   Page   of 6   12

SSC 2.0 - 204: Custom Appliance Selection & Bite Registration  close and open and close and open and close and open and make sure that there's noth -  ing deflecting the jaw. If I saw that she was deflecting, it was pushing her to one side, it  was unnatural arc of closure, then I would start over and do it again. Now, like I said, if you  are super duper cheap and you don't want to buy a George Gauge, they're about 50  bucks, and you don't want to do that, you could use tongue depressors.  [0:19:39]  So you could have the patient bite down, bring their jaw forward and backwards and for -  wards and backwards and come forward comfortably, which is the same spot that she was  before. And that is about a millimeter and a half of vertical, open for me. If we wanted to  make that a little wider, we could break the tongue depressor in half, put it in two of them,  and then all we would do is with the tongue depressor in place, we would squirt the Blu  Mousse   on the back teeth and that would be our bite registration. So there's nothing super  critical about these other than you don't want to deflect the jaw. You want to start in a com -  fortably protruded position. Again, that's the Jamison Spencer sort of language of doing  this. I promise everyone else is going to talk about 50%, 60%, 70% protrusion, stuff like  that. Couldn't care less about that. Where that all came from, I don't want to give you a his -  tory lesson right now. You can watch one of the older films for that if you'd like, but it has to  do with what Peter George, the inventor of the George Gauge, his appliance was one  piece. So he would bring the patient pretty far forward because he found through trial and  error and also through research that that was a good position for them to be in, but he  couldn't adjust the appliance.  [0:20:49]  So I believe we don't treat statistics. So I would rather start comfortable for the patient. And  if we open the airway at that spot, fantastic, we're done. If we need to come farther for -  ward, all the appliances allow us to come 6 to 12 millimeters farther forward. That's quite a  ways. So hopefully that makes sense. If it doesn't, shoot me an email, give me a call,  whatever, but hopefully that makes sense on how to use the George Gauge.  [end of video playback]  The George Gauge (Updated)   [0:21:15]  So here's the update on using the George Gauge. We still use the George Gauge in our  practice. I'm going to describe how we use it a little different in just a minute. But the hand  on there, I mentioned that this type of you've got one of these sitting around, then it is not  heat sterilizable. It will melt it. Or I like to joke that it's one time heat sterilizable, and then  it's a molten piece of sterile plastic, but it will be sterile. But you can only do that once. The  white ones that you would get nowadays are heat sterilizable. The forks are never been  heat sterilizable, so you can't do that. But the body of it is. The comfortably protruded is  the most important part. Comfortably protruded. That's where we start people. And one  thing that I didn't cover on the video, so let me do that now, is I talked about having Jenny  09/01/25   Page   of 7   12

SSC 2.0 - 204: Custom Appliance Selection & Bite Registration  there, and I said "Move your jaw forward, backwards, forward, backwards, come comfort -  ably forward," and then I had her exaggerate and move her jaw way forward. And I said,  "Well, you know what, that seems a little far, go ahead and relax a little bit," and then I was  like, "Hey, how's that feel?" She says, "That feels good." I'm like, "Okay, cool, let's start  there." Okay, and I said, comfortably protruded, and comfortable for two people, the pa -  tient and me.   Okay, the patient and you. That's what I said on the video. Now, I didn't cover  this scenario, so let me do this. Okay, let's say lower jaw, upper jaw that we say, "Okay,  move your jaw forward backwards, forwards, backwards. Now bring your jaw comfortably  forward." And they just sit there. They don't bring their jaw forward at all.  [0:22:48]  And let's try that again, patient, "Okay, bring your jaw forward, good, backwards, good,  forward, good backwards. Okay, now bring it comfortably forward." They just sit there.  Maybe we even do it a third time. Say, "Okay, come forward, they go forward," I see that  they can move forward, "Go backwards. Okay, go, forward again, go backwards. Now  bring your jaw comfortably forward," and they just sit there. Where would we put their jaw?  Where would we start them? No, not edge to edge. We would start them comfortably pro -  truded. Where did they say comfortably protruded was? Here. It was not protruded at all.  Was there comfortably protruded?  [0:23:42]  So the only time that we don't go by the patients comfortably protruded is if they are too far  forward. So the comfortable for two people, me and the patient means if I'm, the only time  I'm not comfortable is if they jerk their jaw all the way forward, and they're like, "That's  good, I'm good." Okay, that's when I'm not comfortable. If they haven't moved their jaw  forward at all, and they say, "Yeah, this is comfortable for me, kind of right here." Great,  that's where I'm going to start. You would never start somebody in a position that they did  not think was comfortable. Does that make sense? So you can go farther forward down  the road. I mean, there may be things you need to do with the appliance to allow that, but  don't worry about that. The only thing to worry about at first is will they wear it at all? Okay,  it does not matter. It doesn't matter if it protects their airway at first. What matters is will  they wear it? Can they get through the night with it? That's what matters. So don't set  yourself up for failure by saying, "Well I really need you to come farther forward here.  [0:24:44]  The literature says that we need you at about 60%, 70% of protrusion." No, you don't. You  need them comfortably protruded. And if comfortably protruded means not protruded at all  for that patient, just start there. That's going to be super rare, but just I want you to be  aware of that. That is what you're going to do.  Those Who Practice in the 21st Century..   [0:25:03]  09/01/25   Page   of 8   12

SSC 2.0 - 204: Custom Appliance Selection & Bite Registration  Okay, so we got the George Gauge, put it together, and then you can use your, again, I  went over the forks and the deep bite cases and all that kind of stuff. And then you can use  your Blu Mousse and then you would have to like send the fork to the lab and stuff like  that. However, for those of you who practice in the 21st century, here's how you're going to  do it now. And I would assume that most people watching this video have a scanner at this  point. If you don't have a scanner, what the flip are you waiting for? If you're a real dentist,  you have no excuse but to get a scanner because if you're thinking in your mind, well,  scanner is not as good as my impression, you're right. It's not.  [0:25:43]  A well-done impression is better than a scanner, it is. But what's happening with your  world-class prosthodontist level impression once it gets to the lab? It's being scanned. It's  not being poured up with stone, unless you work with a very specific lab, and then if you  are, great. Use your reversible hydrocolloid and you do you. But most cases, even if you  are sending models, like you poured it yourself with stone and you send models, then  they're going to scan the models. So at some point here, it's getting scanned. And whatev -  er inaccuracies there's going to be with the scanning, it's going to be at that level. So get  over it. And you're right though. Like I have an interview that I did with Gordon Christensen  in 2024, and he said there is no scanner on the market that is as good as a well-done algi -  nate impression. There is no scanner on the market in 2024, for full arch anyway. For sin -  gle tooth, they get pretty dang close.  [0:27:00]  But he said for full arch, a well-done alginate poured quickly and poured correctly and all  that kind of stuff is better than a scan. However, he makes the point too that none of that  matters because the lab's going to scan it anyway. Okay, so just jump to the future, wel -  come to the future, and start scanning. So how we do this is we basically break off those  little the backs there and maybe use a little Blu Mousse in the front to help the patient hold  their jaw. So you would do the exact same forward, backwards, forward, backwards, com -  fortably forward, hold, tighten it down, make sure you're all good with that, and then maybe  add a little bit of Blu Mousse in the front there to help the patient stabilize their jaw, and  then it's just simply scan on the side, scan on the side. The poster open bite, all scanners  nowadays can do the poster open bite, no sweat. And then you're going to be sending  records like this. So you'll have your models and then you'll have one that is the bite  record. And that's what you're going to send to the lab, and then that's how they're going to  do it. Now, with that in mind, the laboratories do want, remember I use the lowest fork, that  2 millimeter interincisal fork, in order to have the appliance made at the lowest vertical  possible.  [0:28:08]  So don't be surprised when you send in your scans and you send your bite record to a  reputable lab and they're kind of like, "Hey doc, there's not enough room back here in the  second molar area, so we need a little bit more opening here or this is going to be too thin  in the second molar area." And you say, "Cool, do me a favor and you just open it up digi -  tally on your virtual articulator just enough to have just enough material over those second  09/01/25   Page   of 9   12

SSC 2.0 - 204: Custom Appliance Selection & Bite Registration  molars. Do not make it any thicker than you have to." "Well doc, that might make it more  prone to breakage in the second molar area." "I get it. That's okay. I'll sign a release if you  need me to. I'm not going to send this back if it cracks in the second molar. The thing that's  important to me is will the patient be able to close their lips around it? And this is a deep  overbite patient and if you make it really thick, then it's going to be less likely for them to  be able to close their lips around it, which means they won't even wear it."  [0:29:05]  So they're never going to get to the point of us worrying about longevity of the appliance  because they never wore it in the first place because they couldn't close their lips around  it, which made their mouth dry. Okay, get my point? So just be prepared for that, but this is  how we do it now, is scanning and again, hopefully by the time you're watching this, you're  even doing a lot of this in-house. So you're taking your scans, you're putting that into your  software for the printer, you're making the appliance, designing it right there by your your  assistant's doing it and it's being printed while the patient goes and gets a sandwich and  comes back and boom, you're fitting the appliance. Okay, that is what we're doing now or  could do.  Lab Script   [0:29:46]  Okay, lab script, you're going to fill this out. If you're working for a lab, every lab will have a  different thing. Most of this is online now. Again, you upload your impressions or your digi -  tal impressions and your bite records and stuff and then you're going to fill out something  online. You will have the different choices. Remember the wrapping the distal, the second  molars.   Remember posterior support if you want that and then depending on the appliance  you choose, there could be options like soft hard, all hard, clasps, all sorts of stuff like that.  Okay, and that's going to depend on the appliance that you choose and the different things  that you're considering. Again, if you're like, I don't remember all that stuff, go back to level  one where I talk about all of those different considerations. There are some appliances  where you'll have multiple choices for stuff like this. If it's made sort of using traditional  techniques of salt and pepper technique, building it up out of nothing from acrylic, if it's still  using thermoforming, if it's nylon or something like that, there's going to be a lot less op -  tions for you than if it's more traditional methods. And then of course, if you're 3D printing  in-house, then you're 3D printing in-house. But even that, you could have some options  like, I want it a little tighter in this case, a little looser in this case, things like that.  And Last but Far from Least   [0:31:02]  Okay, and last but far from least, make sure that the person handling the insurance billing  is informed of when the fitting is scheduled. This is critical as certain insurance companies  09/01/25   Page   of 10   12

SSC 2.0 - 204: Custom Appliance Selection & Bite Registration  put limits on how long a preauthorization is good for. Okay, so this is an area where maybe  you even have personal experience with this of making a mistake because as a clinician,  you just want to help the patient, right? You just want to, "Hey, we're ready to rock and let's  get the appliance, let's go for it." And then maybe the patient's like "Oh, I've got a trip. I'm  going to be gone for a couple months of the summer, but I'm really excited about this. So  let's go ahead and get my records and let's get rocking and rolling. And when I get back in  August, we're going to get this taken care of." You're like, "That's awesome. You got it.  Let's get that scheduled." And then you find out that the pre-authorization that your staff  got a month ago, because the patient already missed an appointment, that that thing's only  good for 90 days. And the patient's going to come back for their appliance at like 98 days.  And now it's not covered. Okay. So ask me how I know about stuff like that.  [0:32:09]  So everything I teach is from personal experience of doing things wrong. So you're going  to want to make sure that your insurance person, if you work with insurance, is super in  the loop on all this stuff. And it's possible to have a pre-authorization extended. In the sce -  nario I just gave there, all they would have to do is just contact the insurance and say,  "Hey, here's the story." But if you don't do that, you can't do it retroactively. So you couldn't  fit the appliance, not get paid for it, and then go, "Yeah, but," they're going to be like,  "Yeah, no, sorry. That's not how the game is played." But if you know the rules and you  know the situation, then everything's going to be cool. So the billing person needs to be in  intimate connection with this whole process so that they know what's going on. And they're  also going to know if that patient calls up and moves their appointment. They have to can -  cel and reschedule for weeks later or something like that. There's something to be aware  of. Those pre-authorizations oftentimes will run out.  Then What?   [0:33:09]  So the lab's going to fabricate the appliance and return it to you before the date wanted.  Remember that whole pre-authorization thing? We need to kind of plan all that stuff out.  Maybe you made it in your office and that's even simpler. Then as part of this, we're going  to send a letter to that prescribing physician letting them know that the patient's moving  forward. So I call this a thank you for referring letter. So this would be basically thank you  for referring Jamison to our office. We saw him on this date. Here's some details from his  examination. He's a great candidate for oral appliance therapy. He's decided to move for -  ward with therapy and we've got him scheduled on July 18th to fit him with his oral appli -  ance. We will then follow up with you and let you know how he's doing after that. Okay,  there you go. So just a thank you for referring letter. There's examples of that in your doc -  ument center that you can just cut and paste, use the same stuff, make it your own. Does  not need to be detailed, so the doctor does not need your 15-page examination and all this  kind of stuff.  09/01/25   Page   of 11   12

SSC 2.0 - 204: Custom Appliance Selection & Bite Registration  [0:34:14]  They don't care about that. All they care about was the patient went to where I said they  should and they are or are not moving forward with treatment. And if they are not, why they  are not, so you occasionally will have a patient that's not a candidate for oral appliance  therapy or chooses not to or decides I'm not so sure now. Let me get back to you. You're  going to communicate this. So you don't just send this letter if they go into treatment. You  send this letter no matter what to let the doctor know, I saw your patient, here's what we're  doing or here's what we're not doing. One of the biggest complaints that physicians have  about working with dentists is the lack of communication. I don't think I've ever had a  physician say to me, "Yeah, man, the thing I hate about sending a dentist is they over  communicate. They're just sending me stuff all the time. It's such a pain in the butt." Never  heard that before. But I have heard lots of times, "Yeah, I refer my patients to dentists, I  never hear from them again. I have no idea what the patient's doing."  [0:35:14]  Okay, so you don't want to harass them with a whole bunch of stuff. But this thank you for  referring letter, super duper important and it's just going to be again, thank you for refer -  ring. Here's a little bit of data, bottom line, patient's a good candidate. Here's the next step.  Here's what we're doing next. Okay, confirm that everything's in place. Get your insurance  team. We got the financial stuff. We've got it sent to the lab. We know when it's coming  back. We've got the patient scheduled for a while later so that we can make sure we got  the appliance here and that everything's ready to rock and roll before the patient comes in.  This is all done, ready to go before the next step, okay, which the next step is going to be  fitting. But this, we all get all this stuff done. Don't underestimate how important all of these  things are here. This is marketing. It is collections. It is the patient having a great experi -  ence. All of these things are super duper duper important and a little different than what  you're used to as a dentist.  [0:36:17]  So this part though, once you get it going, it'll be a well-oiled machine and this is one of the  areas where if you're getting, if you're total new to this, this is one of the areas where peo -  ple fall down is they kind of treat this like dental. They don't understand the insurance stuff.  Patients get upset. They don't communicate with the doctor because they're not used to  doing that. As a general dentist, you're not used to lots of referrals coming into you. If  you're a specialist, you are. So if you're an orthodontist, then this would not be that out of  the ordinary for you. But if you're a general dentist who's referring you patients? Other pa -  tients? And maybe when another patient refers you a patient, maybe you do send a, "Hey,  thanks for sending your neighbor over to our office, appreciate it." But you for sure don't  say, "Thanks for sending your neighbor over to our office and hey, we're going to do three  implants on your neighbor." No, you're not going to do that, right? So this is different and  new and you can do it. So next step is going to be fitting, but before we got into the fitting,  make sure all of this other stuff is being done correctly.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 12   12

