SSC 2.0 - 208: Referring Back  SSC 2.0   Level 2  208: Referring Back  [intro music]  Referring the Patient Back to the Prescribing MD   [0:00:12]  So let's talk now about referring our patient back to the prescribing MD. Once the patient is  snoring less and feeling better, you're ready to send the patient back. Now, once you've  done this a few times and know what the physicians you're working with expect or what  they would like to do, you can modify this to fit your needs and the needs in your communi -  ty. For example, a sleep doctor that we work with in our Boise practice and that we've  worked with for probably going on 20 years now, he likes to refer the patient and set up a  appointment for them to come back for follow-up sleep study. And that's also the lab where  we titrate these appliances live in the sleep lab almost always. That is rare. As I've taught  this to dentists all over the country and all over the world, there are very few people that  are doing it that way. Now, I'll talk in another session here on why it's by far the best way to  do that, but it's still very rare. So on the other hand, in our Utah practice, the sleep doctors  that we typically work with often won't do follow-up sleep studies of any kind, home sleep  test or otherwise.  [0:01:40]  One of the doctors that they originally worked with, he would do a home sleep test and just  kind of let them know what the results were. And they kind of got used to that for a while.  We don't tend to do that. So it's their job as far as we're concerned to decide if, well, not as  far as we're concerned, it's their job. So remember, our role in this is that the reason on  this slide I have prescribing MD is because an MD prescribed oral appliance therapy and  it's really there. They are the ones directing the care. Therefore, they are the ones to make  the decision on sleep study or not. Speaking of which, just like I've told you that I've never  referred anyone for a sleep study, I've never referred anyone for a follow-up sleep study. I  refer them back to their doctor to have a conversation about a follow-up sleep study and  then their doctor will decide or not. And very often patients will say, oh yeah, I'm not gonna  get another study. That first one was a hassle or that the sleep lab experience was weird  or that thing they sent home with me, I barely slept that night with that thing on.  [0:02:52]  I don't wanna do that again. And I say, yeah, I totally get it. I've done all those things my -  self. I've had an in-lab study. I've done multiple different home sleep tests. I know that is  kind of weird experience. You may not need to do that, but that's gonna be between you  and your medical doctor. And that's it. So again, I'm not telling them yes or no. I'm just ex -  plaining to them the reality and then send them back. So critical point though, is that the  09/01/25   Page   of 1   5

SSC 2.0 - 208: Referring Back  patient is sent back. So I was talking to one of our business elite members today actually,  and she was telling me a story about a doctor in her area and she was talking to him, a  dentist like us, and he has treated lots and lots of sleep apnea patients over the years. And  he had commented to her that he had very few patients that would ever go back to the re -  ferring doctor for follow-up sleep study. And that's why he had been doing some of these  things himself and things like that. And she was surprised because she works in the similar  area there in the same, not exactly the same area, but close geographically. And she has  always referred her patients back and they've gotten follow-up sleep studies.  [0:04:05]  In the practices I deal with, I've had all of these different scenarios. So it really is driven by  the medical doctor. However, regardless of if that doctor is going to get a sleep study or  not, we should always refer the patient back. We should always write a letter. Hey, Jami -  son has come back and he says that he's snoring less and feeling better. I'm returning him  back to your office for consideration of follow-up sleep study, ideally with titration of the  oral appliance in the sleep lab. That would be ideal. Again, we'll talk more about that later.  But everybody goes back, okay? Everybody goes back. You let the doctor know if the doc -  tor's like, eh, if they're snoring less, feeling better, that's fine by me. That would be more of  a primary care doctor way of thinking about things, that if the patient seems to be doing  better, then that's good enough, particularly if the patient's already tried CPAP and failed.  “Sleep Progress Report” & “Oral Appliance Titration Prescription Form”  [0:04:56]  Most sleep doctors will want a objective follow-up and then how they do that will depend  on them, okay? So we got a form for that, or I recommend that you send the doctor your  follow-up form, so your most recent sleep progress report.   If you are blessed like I am to  have doctors that will do titration in the lab, then there's a form for that in your Spencer  Study Club document center. So you'll have this form here, oral appliance titration pre -  scription form, and you write down what the appliance is and what the starting position is  and then what changes to make. You'll need to work with the sleep techs to make sure that  they're comfortable with that, teach them how to do that. Again, I'll talk more about that a  little bit later on the specifics of that. But another quick story, just recently had another of  my business lead members, and he reached out and said, yeah, it was really cool. I was at  a meeting where we were meeting with a local sleep lab and the sleep doctors and the  sleep technicians. And at one point, a sleep technician raised her hand and said, hey, why  can't we adjust the appliances live in the sleep lab? I used to work at a practice where we  did that all the time. And this doctor said, this dentist said, did you happen to work with Dr.  Spencer and Dr. Kuehne?  [0:06:31]  09/01/25   Page   of 2   5

SSC 2.0 - 208: Referring Back  And she's like, how did you know that? And sure enough, so she had moved from Idaho to  South Carolina and was working with this dentist now, and that's where she learned that.  And I've come across that multiple times, either people that literally worked with us per -  sonally, or they worked in a couple of different offices in the country where this has been  done. Just because they aren't doing it now doesn't mean that they can't do it. And as  sleep apnea moves away from being just about fat old men, in 2025, it's still about fat old  men, mostly, again, us dentists know better than that. Our sleep doctor colleagues know  better than that, frankly. But the vast majority of referrals are still for fat old men. I think that  will change.  [0:07:21]  I think that there will be a surge back to in-lab studies, or that the home sleep testing will  have to get much better. We'll have to give us brain waves and actually know that the per -  son's asleep or not, and more detail on sleep efficiency and arousals, and looking at some  of this so-called subclinical level things where their apneas may not be so long as enough  to meet the current definition of an apnea, but they're still having apneas. Their hypopneas  may not make them desat, so it doesn't meet the definition of a hypopnea, but it's still a  hypopnea. We're gonna see that over time as people become more aware that these  sleep disturbances and this mild, so-called, sleep apnea is a big deal and something that  we should address before it gets worse.  Include a Letter to the Prescribing MD   [0:08:18]  All right, so got your forms, got your titration stuff, and in the letter, I'm going to write in  there. So reading from the slide here, in the letter, it should say, quote, for consideration of  objective follow-up with titration of the oral appliance. Okay, I'm sending them back for  consideration. I don't ever refer anyone back for a follow-up sleep study, and as I've told  you before, in our practices, we don't do our own home sleep testing, pulse oximetry, any  of that stuff anymore. Used to. If you want to, that's fine. The reason you might consider  doing that as a beginner is so you know, like you get that person, they're snoring less, feel -  ing better. Their original AHI was 25. You're gonna do your own home sleep test to see if  you've reduced that AHI.  [0:09:07]  If you're gonna do that, try to figure out what units are being used locally, what the doctors  are using where you practice, and get the same one. Okay, if they're using a watch bag,  get a watch bag. If they're using Aries, get an Aries. If they're using a Night Owl, get a  Night Owl. Whatever they're using, get that, 'cause then you'll be comparing apples and  apples. If they're using one device and you use a completely different device, you're gonna  be apples and oranges, and you may be disappointed when they go, and you thought that  you'd hit a home run, and then the doctor comes back and goes, yeah, we did it, and the  HST doesn't show that they're doing that well. Other thing to consider with that when  09/01/25   Page   of 3   5

SSC 2.0 - 208: Referring Back  you're talking to your doctors, 'cause as I told that story before of the one doctor in a pretty  big metropolitan area, and that his doctors weren't doing that, even though we've all been  doing this for 30 plus years now, that doesn't mean that you might not be educating some -  one on what can be done, maybe even what should be done. Have that conversation with  the doctor. Explain to them that titration is really important. Again, I've got a whole session  on titrating the oral appliances in the sleep lab, so we'll go over that more in detail then.  Titration of the Oral Appliance in the Sleep Lab   [0:10:20]  All right. Most of the time, the prescribing MD will want their patient to return if they are a  sleep doctor. If they're a primary care doctor, then again, it's very common just like, hey,  they say they're doing better. They've already tried CPAP. I'm not gonna send them to In -  spire or something like that. So we're good. Oral appliance titration form gives all the de -  tails on how they would titrate that, whether that's live in the lab or even if it's multiple night  HST that works in both of those. Okay, so just kind of some details here on filling this out.  It's pretty self-explanatory. And again, this form will be in your document center and then  you can modify it to meet your practice. So for example, on here, we have just a couple of  appliances as an example, but an EMA, a dorsal, a silent sleep, which is the temporary  appliance that I make. You wouldn't have that on there. Your initial position, the titration  sequence, and note that there's a little asterisk on the third titration. And it says on there, if  on the third titration there appears to be a trend of worsening of the AHI with further pro -  trusion, take the appliance back to the initial position to finish the study.  [0:11:30]  Okay, so sometimes bringing the jaw farther forward will appear to make the airway worse.  They'll tend to have, there seems to be a sweet spot for mandibular protrusion. And if you  go past that, then maybe it starts to collapse the airway in a different dimension or some -  thing. Maybe it just increases their arousals. But anyway, there does seem to be a sweet  spot. The other thing to have here on the slide is I like to have the technician take it back  to the original position as the patient leaves. And so they'll let you know that this band or  this many turns or this many whatever was the best position after you get this follow-up  sleep study back. But I teach the technicians to take them back to the original position be -  cause I don't want anyone to accuse the sleep lab, sleep doctor, sleep technicians of caus -  ing them jaw pain or any of that kind of stuff because they took their jaw too far forward.  Okay, that's not gonna happen. But just this will put the technician's mind at ease that if  they did have to bring them forward to find a better position, they can take them back to  where they came in. And we know that that was a relatively effective position and didn't  cause them any problem prior to that.  09/01/25   Page   of 4   5

SSC 2.0 - 208: Referring Back  Success of Oral Appliance Therapy Based on Symptom-Driven Titration  [0:12:53]  When I go over the titration session, I'll go into a little bit more detail on this, but I thought  I'd put this study in here, a relatively recent study, 2024. And as the, just to read the title,  the successful oral appliance therapy based on symptom-driven titration. So in this study,  they looked at a group of people who were, it uses the term self-titrated here, but they  were, their appliance was adjusted to symptomatic improvement. So this would be snoring  less, feeling better. And what they found, and this is a little higher than results that I'll show  that on earlier studies, but down to the results here, starting right here, our study has  found that 87.5% of the test population was successfully managed with oral appliances  after overnight titration. Now, again, this is the follow-up study. In other words, 75% were  titrated to an AHI less than 5, with an average of 80% reduction from the baseline. That's a  pretty big deal. That's very high to go less than 5. Statistical studies showed the patient's  body mass index and age at baseline.  [0:14:00]  Polysomnography studies significantly influenced the reduction in AHI achieved, whereas  the baseline AHI did not show any significant correlation, said another way. If they were  heavier and older, they didn't do as well as if they were thinner and younger, but AHI didn't  seem to be the chief factor there, and I've for sure seen that too. So body mass index and  age are gonna be a bigger factor of someone being a responder or non-responder than is  the AHI itself. I don't get scared of the AHI at all. And then just in conclusion, that oral ap -  pliance therapy is an effective treatment. This, again, is one of those kind of newer studies  that has shown that oral appliance therapy can be very effective. This also, this was not  titrated by technicians. It wasn't titrated by objective data. It was just purely symptom-dri -  ven first and then following up with them. We can do better than this. But this is not bad.  Even if you just did it completely by, in this case, so-called self-titration or titrating to symp -  tomatic changes, you're gonna be doing pretty darn good.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 5   5

