SSC 2.0 - 209: "Final" Follow Up  SSC 2.0   Level 2  209: "Final" Follow Up  [intro music]  Follow-Up Overview   [0:00:12]  All right. So at this point, the doctor decided to get a follow-up sleep study or not. If a study  was done, you've got that report. You see if maybe we still need to do a little tweaking.  Maybe the patient's snoring less but feeling better, but they do still have a little elevated  AHI or they're still desatting or whatever. Maybe you're talking to the physician about what  changes might be made there. Maybe there's significant desaturations, but the patient's  doing a lot better and the physician decides to put the person on oxygen in conjunction  with the oral appliance. So a lot of different things can happen with that, ranging from the  doctor thinking no follow-up study was indicated at all to a follow-up PSG with titration was  done. All sorts of stuff can happen with that. You're going to work with your local medical  doctor, hopefully with all of that, and then we're going to get to our so-called final follow-up.  Final Follow Up   [0:01:06]  All right. So what's final follow-up? Now, final follow-up is going to look different to different  people. So in our practice that is limited to treatment of sleep and TMJ problems, final fol -  low-up is we're kind of done with that active phase of that patient's treatment. And we're  going to see our patients typically back annually. Now, if you are a restorative dentist, I  would encourage you to do it differently. And that is that you would tell the patient, hey, for  the rest of your life, every time that you come into our practice, I want you to bring your  oral appliance. Regardless, you're coming in to get your teeth cleaned, you're coming in to  get a filling or a crown or something like that, you bring your appliance. Just from now on,  you come to my office, you bring your appliance. That's how I would do it if I were you. And  you don't need to have separate recall, okay? But if you either now are limited or you as -  pire to having a limited practice one day, then you might do it more this way.  Placing the Patient on Recall   [0:02:07]  All right. So they're ready to be placed on recall once they've had that follow-up sleep  study and we found the best position, or the MD decided not to have a follow-up sleep  09/01/25   Page   of 1   11

SSC 2.0 - 209: "Final" Follow Up  study because they think that the current position is effective, the patient's doing well, and  they didn't feel a follow-up sleep study was indicated, or the patient refuses to return to the  MD for even consideration of objective follow-up, you're still sending the letter that says,  hey, patient's doing well, I'm sending them back to you for consideration of objective fol -  low-up, but the patient may not go.  [0:02:42]  You're still gonna communicate no matter what, right? And remember, that's that MD's de -  cision to do or not do, but you will have occasionally a patient's just like not doing it, or  they'll come back to you readily, but they'll let you know, yeah, I never went back for that  follow-up sleep study. I would strongly encourage them to get back to that physician, but  still at this point, you're going to put them on recall because you've basically done what  you can do. Here's our continued care instructions. Again, this will be in your document  center. This is really another level of informed consent, okay? So we've informed consent -  ed them on beginning of the bite changes and tooth movement and all that kind of stuff.  This is giving them another layer of that to remind them of the things that can happen, and  then also just to remind them of how are they supposed to use their appliance.  [0:03:36]  So at the top here, you'll need to continue wearing your oral appliance every night, all night  in conjunction with your CPAP as an adjunct to use of your CPAP such as during travel or  camping. So you're going to circle which one of those. You'll have most of your patients,  they're wearing their appliance every night, all night. That's what they do. You'll have some  people that use it with their CPAP, and then you'll have probably a few, not very many, but  you'll have a few, and this will accumulate over time to have more of people that just use  their oral appliance when they can't or don't want to use their CPAP. All right. So circle  which one that is. Then you're going to go into how long the appliance is anticipated to  last. Now I put on this slide that like two to five years that it would be potentially covered by  their insurance. That's as of 2025, kind of how things are done. However, I think that things  could be changing very soon in how we do this stuff. The insurance, I don't expect that to  change real soon, and it may stay at this sort of useful life of the appliance being that two  to five years. This completely depends on the insurance company. Medicare is five years,  if I'm not mistaken, and a lot of insurance companies follow that. But there are a lot of oth -  er insurance companies that will do it sooner than that.  [0:04:58]  So it will all depend, and this is obviously just in the United States. Where I think it might  change is with printing appliances, we may end up replacing them more frequently and do -  ing that intentionally or by design as a positive. So imagine if we have an appliance like  the 3D EMA, the 3D printed EMA that's available right now, the tray is very, very thin. It's  like an aligner material, right? And let's say that due to the nature of 3D printing versus  milling or traditional thermoforming or whatever, maybe it stains quicker or maybe it breaks  down quicker because it's so thin. It's maybe a little bit more porous than some of these  other materials. Well, would it hurt to replace it every year? Every six months even? Well,  probably not. And all plastics are gonna change over time, right? So if you were to make  09/01/25   Page   of 2   11

SSC 2.0 - 209: "Final" Follow Up  the patient an appliance on their original scans, okay, remember me telling you that all the  appliances I've had made for myself were from scans that are like 2019. Wouldn't it be po -  tentially good to always be coming back to those original scans and to maybe do that more  frequently than every two to five years? I think it is. So I think we're gonna be moving that  direction.  [0:06:31]  Currently, I'm working with some companies to get multiple appliances to the point where  they're 3D printed. And the idea there is that these people that invented these appliances  and all that kind of stuff, they will get some sort of royalty, if you will, when we use that or  some design fee or something like that. And then what would be cool is you might pay that  royalty one time. And then if you need to print additional appliances for that patient, then  you wouldn't pay the royalty anymore because you've already paid for that to be designed.  That can get our price for appliances dramatically less than we've had them in the past.  And I think will actually be better care for the patient. And something that I remember from  years ago, my accountant at the time, he and I would ski together pretty frequently. And  one day we were driving up, it was about a two hour plus drive to the ski resort that we  would go to. And I had given him an oral appliance. And he talked about, he's like, yeah,  so this oral appliance is working great.  [0:07:35]  And my wife says I'm not snoring anymore and I'm feeling so much better. This is really  cool. How long do I usually go before I get another one? And I was like, oh, wow, yeah,  that appliance we gave you, you should be able to get three to five years out of that, no  problem. And his response was like, gross. Now he's like, gross, what do you mean gross?  He's like, well, gross, I'm wearing this thing every night for years? And I'm like, well, yeah,  you just brush it when you brush your teeth and it'll stay looking good and everything will  be fine. He's like, oh, I think I'd like it better if it was something that I replaced more often.  Like something that maybe every month I just got a new one or something like that. I think  that'd be a lot better. That was a long time ago. That's minimum 15 years ago that he said  that. And I remember at the time thinking, oh, that's curious that the patient would want  something more routinely changed because he perceived that as more hygienic than  something that he'd wear literally for years.  [0:08:41]  And the more I think about that now, I mean, that's right, right? So again, as dentists, I  know that we think more about longevity and whatnot, but I think it could be really nice and  something that the patient would really like if we get these down. So 3D printing, the costs  are getting down, the materials are getting down. I think that we're on the horizon here.  And hopefully by the time you watch this of having appliances that will cost you $20, $30  to make in materials and stuff, maybe a little bit with time, but very little. And that you'll be  able to give patients these appliances on a regular basis, which will mean your followup is  better. Your contact with them is better. You're checking them for potential side effects is  better, all better. The disadvantage of an appliance that's gonna last for 10 years and still  look like the day you gave it to them is that they may never come back. That's not great.  09/01/25   Page   of 3   11

SSC 2.0 - 209: "Final" Follow Up  So I'm sure that some of the appliance manufacturers would strongly disagree with me on  that, right? But I don't care what they think.  [0:10:01]  I care about what the patient thinks. So I think it'll be more common that a patient would  think, oh, that's cool. I get a new one every three months. That increases value to me ver -  sus, yeah, this thing is gonna last you for 10 years. I think another part of that too is when  things cost a certain amount and stuff like that, you might be concerned about losing it,  dog eating it, stuff like that. I travel a ton as you would imagine. I've left stuff in hotels. I've  never left an oral appliance in a hotel. But our patients will do that kind of stuff all the time.  And wouldn't it be cool if you were in a position that somebody had something happen and  you're kind of like, hey, no problem. That's covered. If you lose an appliance, we'll replace  that one for you for free. We give you one kind of freebie with this because of how we do  this. So I think that's where we're headed. But right now, that may not be where we are,  but that is where we're headed. So this will change this form. And again, Word doc, you  can change this to say whatever you want it to say, but this will kind of get you going.  [0:11:04]  So we're going to replace the appliance at some point. Make sure they're bringing it back  to you or, in my case, that they're going to their dentist. Now, here's a little nuance here.  So with a practice like mine that is limited and all my patients have a dentist, as I've talked  about before, I tell them, hey, if your dentist needs to do anything, like put in a crown or a  dental implant or anything that changes your mouth, I will change the appliance. We will  change the appliance. Your dentist doesn't need to do that. Okay. So that's a little courtesy  that we offer. And that is so that the dentist doesn't accidentally mess something up or be  accused of messing something up. So I would do the same thing if I were you in your  community is when you're communicating to the patient's regular dentist or whatever, let  them know, hey, should anything change in this patient's mouth, I will adapt the appliance  to those changes. Just let me know, give me a heads up, and we can plan that together.  You don't need to change anything. That's the way to do that.  [0:12:14]  Okay. Then lastly, we're going to go over the potential side effects, jaw movement, tooth  movement, check your bite every night, floss like a boss, all that kind of stuff, use of the  morning reprogrammer, all of this we're going to go over one more time. So this is, again,  informed consent. We're doing this every time they come in, reinforcing it over and over  again, and then most importantly, letting them know that long-term follow-up is critical.  Maybe sharing with them again that as they get floppier and older, they can expect their  sleep apnea to possibly get worse. That if they lose weight and things like this, that can  help. But unfortunately, just the sands of time are going to move on for everybody, and that  floppier, older thing is going to happen, and that means we need to be checking and  means also that their position that is super-duper effective may all of a sudden become  less effective. As soon as they notice that, they should get back in.  09/01/25   Page   of 4   11

SSC 2.0 - 209: "Final" Follow Up  With the EMA   [0:13:14]  All right. So with the... Just give you some specifics on a couple different appliances here.  With an EMA, then we'll typically give the patient like a six-month supply of bands in that  length and color that they've been using. You could give them a little bit shorter band if you  wanted to. Remember that the big advantage of a pull-style appliance is you're in control.  So I'm not going to give them a bunch of bands to take their job way farther forward. That  makes no sense. We already know what's working, so we're going to do that. And explain  they can get more bands if they need to. They can call our office. We actually have on our  website where they can kind of click and order bands. But if they're not up to date on their  recalls, then we make them come in before they can get new bands. EMA bands will show  up on Amazon every once in a while, and then the EMA company tries to shut that down.  They're not the same. So this isn't somebody that's buying EMA bands and reselling them  because that would make no sense because EMA bands are expensive. It's someone  somewhere that has made them in the same colors and everything, but they're way  stretchier. So even if a thinks, oh, I'm going to buy these myself, they won't have the same  effect. They won't have the same efficacy.  [0:14:34]  If you're using an appliance like a dorsal fin appliance, an interlocking appliance, a herbs  style appliance, whatever. So the EMA, you would kind of write down the band number  and stuff like that. On any other appliance, you're going to measure, and usually the appli -  ance will have some sort of mechanism to where you can tell where you're at. In worst  case scenario, you would count the number of turns. So if the patient came in, they're in a  dorsal appliance, for example, with a jack screw, they're doing well in that position. Every -  thing's awesome. You're going to leave them there. Then to put in your records, you would  note how many turns forward that is, which means you would go backwards, one, two,  three, four, five, six, and count like 22 turns on the right, 22 turns on the left, putting them  back, of course, and then you would know that that's where that patient left. Every appli -  ance is going to have some way to figure that out. Just make sure you notate what that  position is.  Ask for Referrals!   [0:15:33]  Then ask for referrals, and probably you've asked for referrals, hopefully, before now. But if  you'd forgotten, then this would be the time to do this. The best time to ask for referrals is  when the patient tells you, oh my goodness, this has changed my life. That is the best  time. However, when you're putting them on long-term follow-up, this is a good time to be  like, hey, you know what, we're so happy that you've had such a good experience here.  We look forward to caring for you long, long term. We are trying to attract more nice peo -  ple like you. This is a big part of how we get patients here is by people like you telling their  09/01/25   Page   of 5   11

SSC 2.0 - 209: "Final" Follow Up  friends and family members. If you would be so kind as to send us friends and family and,  you know, nowadays we would also ask if you could also maybe give us a five-star Google  review, that would be awesome because nowadays a lot of people will look at those re -  views before they come into our office. If you could tell your story in that five-star Google  review, that'd be awesome. Okay. Note a couple things there. We'll talk more about this in  the marketing section, but I said a five-star Google review, not just a Google review be -  cause you don't necessarily want a four-star Google review.  [0:16:51]  So I say five-star Google review. The reason we say five-star Google review is if they are  thinking, well, I don't think I can give you a five-star Google review, hopefully they would  say that out loud, but they probably won't. And if they won't, then they're not going to go to  give you a four-star Google review, probably. If they were going to do that, then theoretical -  ly, if they're a nice, honest person, they would bring up, well, you know, not positive I can  give you a five-star Google review because of whatever, and then that would give you a  chance to fix it. Okay. Bottom line, you're getting your referrals from your referral sources.  Important that you let your patient know how grateful you are for their doctor referring them  to you. Say things like, hey, when you go back to your doctor, if you could say, you know,  what a good experience you're having with our office and with your oral appliance therapy,  that would be awesome too. This is just another way to grow your practice.  Paperwork! - Thank you for Referring   [0:17:48]  And paperwork, right? So we're going to send a letter to the referring doctor as well as  their dentist, any other doctors that they may have seen. So let's say you're working with a  sleep doctor. Probably they have a primary care doctor. Maybe they have some other spe -  cialists that they see. They have a dentist. We're going to send a letter, possibly with the  last follow-up note, and letting those doctors know that we've placed this patient on long-  term follow-up. This is just another way to market. So the letters that we're sending out, if  you've been keeping track here, is we have our, what we call our thank you for referring  letter. And that would be that initial one letting them know that we've seen their patient and  here's the next steps. Whether that patient's going to move forward to treatment or not,  we're still going to send that thank you for referring letter to let them know we saw their pa -  tient. Then if the patient went into treatment, you could send one then that says we fit the  patient and here's our steps. You don't necessarily need to do that. So in your thank you  for referring letter, if the patient has decided to move forward with treatment, you'd proba -  bly know at that point and you can say patients decide to move forward with treatment. We  plan to fit them with an oral appliance on whatever date. We'll see them back for follow-up  and then send them back to you.  09/01/25   Page   of 6   11

SSC 2.0 - 209: "Final" Follow Up  Consideration of Objective Follow-Up and Long-Term Recall   [0:19:03]  So the second letter typically in our model would be, hey, patient's snoring less feeling bet -  ter, sending them back to you for consideration of objective follow-up. That's that consid -  eration of a follow-up sleep study letter. And then this would be the third one, which is pa -  tient's doing great and we've put them on long-term recall and sure appreciate helping this  patient and appreciate your ongoing referrals. Those are the three. And again, if you want  to build your practice, you copy these to everyone that they've ever seen and in a pretty  short period of time, you will be getting referrals from doctors you've never heard of before.  And just that word of mouth works and doctors are talking to other doctors and you know  what, I did this with my patient and sent to this dentist and you'll start getting referrals from  all over the place. And remember, your billing team has been involved in all of this. They're  going to make notes on when that patient's going to be eligible for a new appliance, when  their annual follow-up is, all that kind of stuff. The billing team needs to be involved in the  whole scenario here.  [0:20:16]  By the way, on that replacing appliances, that is a, as I mentioned, an insurance-specific  rule, which also means if they change insurance, it's a new set of rules. And I mean that in  a positive way. So let's say they were on Blue Cross when they got fit and now they've  changed to Aetna. So Aetna doesn't say, well, no, they got an appliance from Blue Cross a  year ago, so we're not paying for one. That's not how it works. So if someone changes in -  surance, so every year your billing team needs to be looking at the patients coming in, up -  dating their insurance information, and if you've got a team that's on the ball there, if they  see it's like, oh, yeah, my insurance information changed. They see that as they get the  new insurance card. Hey, you were on Blue Cross a year ago, now you're with Aetna. Cu -  rious how you're doing with your appliance therapy. Oh, it's awesome. It's changed my life.  So now that you're with a new insurance, if you're interested, we could check to see if they  would cover another appliance for you. Since you've changed insurance companies, they  probably will. What? No way. So I can get a new appliance? I thought it was going to be  like five years or something like that. Well, typically when you're staying on a single insur -  ance company, it is, but since you moved to another insurance company, that's new rules.  So they could cover it for you. We could look into that for you if you'd like us to. Oh, that'd  be amazing. Thank you very much. Okay? Keep the billing people in the loop.  Follow-Up is Forever   [0:21:46]  Follow-up is forever older, floppier, sands of time, all that stuff, disease coming back, get -  ting worse, changing, okay, anatomy changing. This isn't fit it and forget it. This is one of  the biggest problems with the do-it-yourself model and even just, sometimes doctors not  really understanding what we're doing here. There's a lot of fit it and forget it, a lot of here's  09/01/25   Page   of 7   11

SSC 2.0 - 209: "Final" Follow Up  this goodbye type of stuff, and that's not what we're doing. So this really is managing their  care over time. That to you as a restorative dentist is not going to sit very well, by the way.  You need to come to terms with that. We don't tend to manage people. We tend to kind of  fix them.  [0:22:46]  We're surgeons, remember. So when there's a hole in the tooth, we restore it. When  they're missing a tooth, we place an implant there. When they are missing all their teeth,  we do dentures or implant retained dentures or whatever. We got all these different things  that we can do to fix the problem. We don't tend to manage stuff. That's more our medical  colleagues that put people on medications and then they see what's going on and then  they see how their blood has changed and then they change their medication and they  manage this and then the person gains weight and then this other problem comes up.  That's like their job, right? Surgeons don't tend to be involved with that. This is managing.  Thankfully, it's not as complicated as what I just talked about before because it's still  anatomy. So we are going to manage this and that just means annual follow-up forever.  And as long as they do that, the odds of them having side effects will also be dramatically  reduced. And the nice thing from a financial aspect for you is this is one of the few things  in dentistry. So I've brought up crowns. I've brought up implants. I've brought up dentures.  I've brought up all that stuff.  [0:24:03]  Think of what you do as a dental professional that insurance will pay for it. If the person's  on the same insurance for years and years and years, insurance will pay for that treatment  to be redone every two to five years. And if it is redone, the patient wouldn't be upset about  it. And I'm not talking cleanings or things like that. That's a different story. But something  like a crown or dental implant or stuff like that, this doesn't exist, right? So you may think,  well, yeah, a crown, Jamison, the insurance will pay for a new crown every five years.  True. However, how long does your patient think that crown is supposed to last? Forever,  right? So all dentistry is forever dentistry as far as the patient's concerned. So imagine a  scenario where I'm your patient and I come in and you're like, hey, Jamison, good news.  That crown we placed on your lower molar there five years ago, we checked and your Blue  Cross dental insurance is going to pay for a new one. And I'd be like, oh, okay, cool. Is  there a problem? Have I not taken good enough care of it or something or what?  [0:25:19]  Do these things only last five years? Oh, no, no, no, no. Actually, the crown that we placed  is looking perfect. Your oral hygiene is perfect. Everything's great with it. But just your in -  surance will pay for a new one. So I was thinking, let's cut it off and we'll do a new one on  you. But I don't really need a new one. It's just because insurance will cover it. Well, yeah,  right? I mean, yeah, let's just put a new one on. Okay. I know you would never do that. And  if you did do that, then your patient would get up and leave because they're like, what kind  of charlatan am I dealing with here? Oral appliance therapy is completely different, right?  Because this is, they're using something on a nightly basis. It's changing their life. And now  all of a sudden you say, hey, good news. The billing team always on top of things and al -  09/01/25   Page   of 8   11

SSC 2.0 - 209: "Final" Follow Up  ways on the ball like they are. They checked before you even came in here today. And it's  been three years since you got that oral appliance that you've been using. I know time  flies. Blue Cross will pay for another one.  [0:26:21]  They've already checked. It's going to be 280 bucks out of pocket. Would you like to go  forward with that? Because if I were you, I'd be a little nervous with only my one appliance  there. Because what if the dog eats it? What if you leave it in a hotel room? What if some -  thing happens that would be a bummer? So for very little cost, we can get you a second  appliance if you'd like. And in my experience, the patients are always like, uh-huh? Yeah,  let's for sure do that. Okay. And also you've got like history with this patient. You know  what's going on. So even if they're out of pocket is a little bit more or whatever, you could  do a payment plan. All sorts of stuff you could do there. Just don't forget this. Okay. This is  a big deal. And as your practice gets bigger, as it gets more history behind it. So at this  point in our practices, we do hundreds of thousands of dollars of new appliances a year.  Okay. Hundreds of thousands of dollars of patients we've treated over the years that are  just getting new appliances. That's a big part of our practice is just new appliances for pa -  tients that have been cared for for a long time. We're managing these patients and that  becomes a big part of your care.  Regular/Annual Follow-Up   [0:27:36]  Annual follow-up. How do we do that? Pretty simple. And you could do some of this  telemedicine, although we really like to get our patients in in person. However, there are  certain circumstances that you may do something via telemedicine, but I'd want it like  video telemedicine, right? So you could kind of see, you could have them tap their teeth  together. Actually, you know what? Something I forgot to mention. I've talked about this on  another session, but let me reinforce it here, is the shim stock. Remember I talked about  that there's the things that are post-it note flags that are plastic and they're used for like  marking pages in a book? Give those to your patient, and they can put those in and bite on  it and hold it, bite on it and hold it. So they could do that over telemedicine too and show  you, like, hey, you got the little post-it flag? Pop that in between your back teeth. Can you  still hold that there between your back teeth? You can? Cool. You can? Cool. Great. That's  going to be basically almost as good as you doing it in the office. So there's ways you  could do this. Make sure you see them annually though.  [0:28:39]  We want to make sure they don't have bite changes, don't have tooth movement, that  they're still, the snoring is less, they're feeling better. If they're using SnoreLab or some -  thing like that, they're tracking with their Garmin watch. We want to make sure that they  are doing well over time. One of the advantages that CPAP has over oral appliance thera -  py is, CPAP is kind of like doing a sleep study every night. So the CPAP machine knows if  09/01/25   Page   of 9   11

SSC 2.0 - 209: "Final" Follow Up  there's mask leak, it knows if there's apneas or hypopneas, just based on the pressure dif -  ferential there. And it's uploading this information. The sleep doctor has access to it. And at  any given time, they can log in to see if the patient's using their CPAP, how long they're  using their CPAP, how many nights a month they're using their CPAP. All this data is there.  For us, we don't have really any of that data. And even if we did, it wouldn't be to that  same level as CPAP.  [0:29:31]  So we're going to have the patient tell us what's going on. And again, there's other things  that you could use to help you with that. Patients are pretty good with this. And if you are  treating yourself, you know that you can get pretty good at feeling if things are working  right or stuff like that. So just be prepared for that. Annual follow-up, that's going to be the  way to go.  Thank You Doctor.   [0:29:54]  And kind of lastly here, we get our card from the patient. Thank you, doctor, for saving my  life. This is from screening to final follow-up that we've gone through here is kind of an  overview of all these things with the little details here. We're going to go into some more  details on a few things here. But let me reinforce this idea of the ripple effect and the im -  pact that you're having on the world as a whole. This is... I cannot overstate this. Every pa -  tient that you treat for their sleep apnea, you are making them a better husband, a better  wife, a better mother, a better father, a better student, a better employer, a better employ -  ee, a better citizen.  [0:30:47]  You are making it more likely for them to not overreact. You're making it less likely for them  to domestically abuse someone, to hurt someone. You're making it less likely for them to  hurt themselves. You can't look at anything health-related that doesn't come back to sleep.  Poor sleep is never prescribed for anything. There's no disease out there that they say,  well, try to make your sleep way worse. That'll probably help you. On the contrary, almost  every problem and metabolic problem and emotional problem and everything else is  helped by proper sleep. This is what you're doing. What do you think the brain cares more  about, air or a good night's sleep? Well, air, because even though all that stuff I just talked  about of how important sleep is, air is more important because if we go without air for very  long, we're dead. We can go without good sleep for a long time, and so many people do.  So this is why you're here. We just went through the whole overview. We'll go into more  detail on some of these little points, but I want you to always come back to this. Always  come back to that ripple effect.  [0:32:22]  Always come back to this because it's worth it. It's worth it to learn. It's worth it to have  some cases that don't go so well. You will almost never in your career make someone's  09/01/25   Page   of 10   11

SSC 2.0 - 209: "Final" Follow Up  sleep apnea worse. And even on the one where you're like, well, they did get worse, Jami -  son. I bet they didn't. Their AHI may have gotten worse, but maybe that's because they  went from having 30-second apneas down to 15-second apneas. And now there's more  15-second apneas than there were 30-second apneas, so it appears that their AHI is  worse because that number got higher. But it's not actually worse. When you look at the  details, and we'll go over this when we talk about reviewing sleep studies and looking at all  this kind of stuff, this tends to be our job for some reason, but I literally cannot remember a  person that we made worse. Okay? You're not going to have that problem either, and  you're going to change the world, and the impact that you will have, you will never com -  pletely understand. Because these ripple effects are going to go out for generations start -  ed by you, and you'll never, ever, ever understand the magnitude of the impact you made.  [0:33:33]  I'm glad you're here. Hope that you learned a lot with this screening to final follow-up. We'll  dig into some more details here to make you comfortable. Level 3 is going to give you all  the TMD stuff to make you really comfortable, because frankly, all this dental sleep medi -  cine stuff is easy as long as you're an expert in TMD. And we're going to help you with you  there too. All right. Take care.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 11   11

