SSC 2.0 - 210: Adjusting Oral Appliances  SSC 2.0   Level 2  210: Adjusting Oral Appliances  [intro music]  Adjusting Oral Appliances - Oral Appliance Selection   [0:00:12]  Welcome. In this session, we're going to talk more about adjusting oral appliances, choos -  ing oral appliances, really treating people, and also what can go wrong or what can we  look at if oral appliance therapy doesn't seem to be as successful as perhaps we had  hoped or the patient had hoped or their doctor had hoped. What are some things that can  go wrong with oral appliance therapy and some things that you may not have even con -  sidered, some things that have actually nothing to do with the oral appliance itself? But  let's kind of jump in first to oral appliances and have a little bit of a review here. Let me  point out some things that I've talked about in level one, but to give you a little bit of a dif -  ferent twist on it now that you're getting a little bit more experienced and have this back -  ground information pretty dialed in.  All Mandibular Advancement Devices Do the Same Thing   [0:01:07]  So oral appliance selection, we've got to remember that all mandibular advancement de -  vices do the same thing. They anchor to the maxilla and they keep the lower jaw, the  mandible, from falling back or they bring it forward a little bit. Please try to get that dia -  logue, that language built into how you talk about oral appliance therapy. It's not about  jacking the jaw forward. It's about keeping the jaw from falling backwards. And this is more  important with the younger, healthier, thinner people that you treat. It's not really about  jacking their jaw a long ways forward. This goes back also to the comfortably protruded  way of taking a bite record. It's not about having to take them to 80% maximum protrusion  like they used to teach, you know, when I got started in this field. That's not what we need  to do.  [0:02:01]  Another thing to kind of think about is this anchorage to the maxilla. Yeah, we're anchoring  to the maxilla, but we're anchoring to the maxillary teeth. And why I kind of point that out is  the teeth, as you know, are more able to move because of the periodontal ligament, be -  cause of forces, because of how osteoblastic and osteoclastic conditions are a result of  pressure on the teeth, forward, backwards, sideways, whatever. That's how orthodontics  works, obviously. If we just screwed screws, if we put implants into someone's maxilla and  09/01/25   Page   of 1   14

SSC 2.0 - 210: Adjusting Oral Appliances  then held the mandible from falling backwards or brought it forward on that, nothing would  really change on the maxillary side. The reason that you could have a change in the maxil -  la, so to speak, would be because of the teeth.  [0:03:00]  So we're anchoring to the teeth. Now, this is actually a reason why I like it when people  have dental implants, because that implant's not going to move. And now the bummer is,  though, most people that have dental implants have spent a lot of money on their dental  implants, so they don't want you to anchor on them. So that's a bit of a bummer. But if you  have a patient that you can explain to them the advantage of that anchorage onto the im -  plant, that's going to make it less likely for you to have side effects. So once again, all of  these things do the same thing. So any manufacturer out there or whatever that tries to  make some case that there's some sort of magic, it's not. They're all anchoring into the  maxilla, they're keeping the mandible from falling backwards, or they're bringing it forward  in some way.  Types of Appliances   [0:03:45]  As you know, I break down these oral appliances into five different mechanisms of action.  We have our anterior pull push, things like the TAP, push appliances, all the different Herb -  st appliances, pull, something like the EMA or Silent Night, interlocking, so it'd be like dor -  sal, ProSomnus appliances, stuff like that. Now, I just said a brand name there, so Pro -  Somnus, of course, has a Herbst as well and has other type of appliances, but I think you  know what I mean when I just say that. And I've got one, of course, pictured right here, so  that'd be an interlocking appliance. Adjustable monoblocks, almost nobody uses ad -  justable monoblocks. I mean, one of my friend John Parker has the PM, the Parker PM  positioner, and he hasn't used it for probably 20 years probably at this point. Alan Moses  invented the Moses to maximize tongue space. He's retired. I don't know anyone that uses  the Moses.  [0:04:41]  So the monoblock appliances, less in favor because, you know, kind of all of us would like  to be able to move our jaw around a little bit if we want to. However, from years of using  monoblock appliances, so the original appliances that you haven't even seen anymore, the  NAPA, nocturnal airway patency appliance, that appliance that was one piece and Peter  George of the George Gauge fame, that's what he was using all the time and that's why he  came up with 70% to 80% of maximum protrusion. That's the history behind all of these  rules and stuff, right?  [0:05:16]  The fact that the original founding fathers of dental sleep medicine used monoblock appli -  ances a lot should give you some comfort in that if you have an appliance, let's say you  have a pull appliance and the patient's doing well, but they're stretching out the bands and  09/01/25   Page   of 2   14

SSC 2.0 - 210: Adjusting Oral Appliances  that's kind of annoying, but they're doing great. They don't have any periodontal problems.  They don't have any TMJ problems. They don't have any real problems at all. Then you  can put that appliance together. I'll talk about that later, but you could bond it and I'll talk to  you about how to temporarily bond it and then to permanently bond it and you can make it  a monoblock.  [0:05:57]  But this is after you've already figured out this is the best spot and the patient tolerates it.  And again, we do a little temporary trial of the monoblock and you could do all that. But  again, kind of even though you're not going to go to an Academy of Dental Sleep Medicine  meeting and walk around the exhibit hall and see the latest line of monoblock appliances,  you just aren't going to see those. It's not that they're bad. It's just that these appliances  allow us to adjust things and allow the jaw to move in more natural ways we find to be bet -  ter for more people.  Temporary Trial Appliances   [0:06:29]  And the last one I have on here in the temporary trial appliances. Sometimes when I cre -  ate this slide, I only have the five mechanisms of action and then temporary trial is like a  separate thing. And that's actually more appropriate. I put it on here for you guys just to  kind of remind us that any temporary trial appliance is going to fit into one of these five  mechanisms of action. Okay, so you have temporary EMA style appliances, temporary  TAP style appliances.  [0:06:57]  I'm not familiar with any temporary interlocking appliances off the top of my head. But usu -  ally if you saw a temporary appliance that would fit into one of these other categories.  Frankly, I think temporary appliances are basically going to go away. Right now in 2025,  the myTAP, for example, which is an excellent temporary appliance, costs more than it  would cost me to print an EMA in-house. So why would I do it? I think, and also again,  that's right now with only one appliance, the EMA, as I'm recording this, the only one that  you can print in-house in the United States anyway. And that fee, you know, add it all up  would be a little bit more maybe or right around what it would cost to do a myTAP.  [0:07:45]  Those would be similar costs or even less possibly with the EMA. But that's also just the  first time because I have that royalty that I have to pay. And if I then made another EMA in-  house, I would not have that royalty and that's going to bring the cost down dramatically. I  think as more and more and more companies bring this in-house ability to print, you're go -  ing to see the prices go way down on the royalties and things like that that they're charg -  ing. So again, if you have the ability to make something custom for that patient as a tem -  porary device, as a trial appliance, as something like that, and it only costs you 50 bucks,  09/01/25   Page   of 3   14

SSC 2.0 - 210: Adjusting Oral Appliances  let's say, why wouldn't you do that? Why would you risk using something bulkier or thicker  or whatever and the patient not liking it?  The ONE Best Appliance   [0:08:43]  Because we need to remind ourselves of what is the one best appliance? 130 plus FDA  approved oral appliances on the market. What's the best one? The best one is the one  that the patient will actually use. Remember, it's not the one that will work. I get that a lot  when I lecture and I ask this question, what is the one best appliance? And most dentists  in the room, they'll kind of get what I'm going for there is that the one best appliance is,  and they'll say the one that works. And then I'll say, well, define work. If by work you mean  the patient actually uses it, then yeah, we're on the same page. They have to be able to  use it in order for it to work.  [0:09:28]  So the art in this field is you figuring out what will they actually wear? And this requires  some time and effort on your part. This requires you having multiple appliances made for  yourself. I know that that's not cheap, but it's going to be an investment that's worth it for  you to get all the different types of appliances that you think you might want to use.  [0:09:52]  I try to think here really quick. I don't think I've ever used an appliance on a patient that I  haven't worn myself first. I don't think I have. And granted, that's usually, sometimes you  take that a little bit with a grain of salt because sometimes because I run Spencer Study  Club and things like that, I don't have to ask very hard for them to kind of send me an ap -  pliance to try because they want me to say nice things about their appliance. So it's not  that I've had to necessarily buy a whole bunch of these, but I have bought a whole bunch  of them. So early on in my career, then I would buy the TAP appliance and the different  TAP appliances and the EMA appliance and the new Herbst appliance that came out and  whatever.  [0:10:40]  And usually if you ask the manufacturer, say, hey, I'm a dentist. I'm making this for myself  so that I get some experience with it. They will either make it at a significant discount or  free. They know it is for you. Strongly, cannot more strongly encourage you to do that. And  then you'll have your experience. If you're a vertical non-lateral grinder like I am, so I don't  grind my teeth, in other words, I don't laterally brux. I might clench maybe sometimes. I  don't think so. I get away with any appliance. So I can wear any appliance on the market  and does fine. And then I can tell my patients what are the pros and cons. But I literally  have never had an appliance that I couldn't wear. Now I have ones that I like better than  the others, but all of them I could use. You, if you're a lateral bruxer, then you're going to  find that there's certain types of appliances that you might struggle to use that might cause  09/01/25   Page   of 4   14

SSC 2.0 - 210: Adjusting Oral Appliances  some discomfort and things like that. That's good experience for you to have because then  you can talk to your patients who have evidence of lateral bruxism.  Appliance Selection - Things to Consider   [0:11:46]  I went over this stuff in level one, but so I'll just kind of quickly hit these bullet points here  just as a reminder. But remember lateral bruxer, that's the biggest one. If they have evi -  dence of lateral bruxism, meaning they've got worn canines or cuss tips, then you want to  give them an appliance that allows them to move side to side. As we've discussed before,  sometimes bruxism is related to their airway issue. And if it is, and the airway issue is im -  proved, then it's possible that their bruxism will get better or even go away. Don't count on  that though. So we hope for the best, we plan for the worst. So lateral bruxer, make sure  you've got an appliance that will allow them to move laterally.  Mouth Closed, Mouth Open   [0:12:28]  Desire to keep their mouth closed, desire the ability to open their mouth. This is one where  you have to talk to the patient. And when they say, hey, I sleep with my mouth open, re -  member you have to ask, do you want to sleep with your mouth open? Oh no, I need  something to keep my mouth shut. Okay, so then you would have an appliance that is bet -  ter at keeping the mouth shut than perhaps another one. Or you could consider mouth  TAPing, stuff like that. On the other hand, somebody's like, oh yeah, if I couldn't open my  mouth, I'd be terribly claustrophobic, that would be a real problem for me. Okay, that pa -  tient, then you want to have the appliance have the ability to open. Now we're going to  hope that they don't open their mouth, right? And we're going to do things while we get  them into treatment that will help them keep lip closure and breathe through their nose.  That's all very important.  [0:13:15]  But if the person tells you up front, I'm claustrophobic, that's going to not feel good to me if  I can't open my mouth to breathe, and you give them an appliance that really shuts them  down and closes them off, and you're thinking, okay, well, I'm going to do mouth TAPing or  whatever, and that person can't breathe through their nose, well, that's a no-go. So they're  not going to proceed because they'll feel so claustrophobic, they won't be able to breathe.  [0:13:39]  If you want to figure that out in advance, if you're not sure, then you could try mouth TAP -  ing while they're awake. A person that can't breathe through their nose is going to immedi -  ately realize that's a no-go. And you can also try afrin and breathe right strips or the nasal  aid, something that opens up the nasal passage. You can do that too. Okay, so that's kind  of the mouth closed, mouth open stuff. Retention issues, this will also take into account, or  09/01/25   Page   of 5   14

SSC 2.0 - 210: Adjusting Oral Appliances  you need to take this into account because some appliances like the pull-push appliances  that are attached to the front, the TAP appliances, they need some decent retention or  they're just going to pop off. An EMA, a pull appliance, any EMA, silent night, panthera ap -  pliances like that with the bands, when you open, if you are missing lower posterior teeth  or just have poor retention, those are going to pop off too. So too little retention is usually  our problem. Too much retention, usually not a problem because you can adjust the appli -  ance accordingly. Okay, missing teeth, I just kind of covered there too. Depending on the  appliance and where that anchorage is happening, you would want to have good teeth in  that area.  Restoration and Future Restorative   [0:14:53]  So next with restorations and future restorative, if you've been a member of Specialty  Study Club for a long time, I would have talked about different appliances with soft liners  and things like that that you could, or soft liner that you could rip out, hard liner that you  could grind out, things like that. Again, as we now kind of go into a new era of dentistry  with digital dentistry, that becomes less important because you might just reprint the appli -  ance. You can also think it through. If you know that a crown has to be redone and the  contours and everything about that crown are great, then the new crown could be made  exactly like either the tooth that was there or the crown that was previously there. So just  kind of think through this process, and there will be occasions where you can use some of  those sort of old-school techniques of the soft liner or the acrylic liner, and you know that  you're going to grind it out or whatever. But just I would encourage you to think that  through in your appliance selection, whereas if you did a nylon appliance, then you're go -  ing to need to make sure that that new crown is exactly the way it was before because  those appliances are so thin that there's no way that you could modify that.  [0:16:13]  Okay, so just thinking through what is happening with that patient for longer term with fu -  ture restorative and stuff like that. Distance the patient has to travel is a concern in that  how is it adjusted. I've told the story in level one that we saw patients in Alaska for I think  my partners went up there for about five years, about once a month or so, and we gave  those people up there typically interlocking style appliances, dorsal fin appliances, TAP-  style appliances. So we would give them things that didn't require the bands because we  knew that shipping bands to them in Alaska would just be a little bit of a hassle. They  wouldn't be able to come into our office because, you know, they're in Alaska, we're in  Boise. And so that went into our thought process of could we give them something that  would be less of a problem long term. Now that's not to say that a pole-style appliance is a  problem. It's actually fabulous if you have patients that are near you because you want  them to come in on a regular basis and have those follow-ups and stuff like that.  [0:17:27]  09/01/25   Page   of 6   14

SSC 2.0 - 210: Adjusting Oral Appliances  So just kind of keep that in mind too. Ability to return for follow-up is sort of the same thing,  although you could even have that in your local area too. I've treated patients that have  great difficulty coming in or being brought in, and so the easier I could make it on them to  not have to come back for a bunch of appointments, that was important as well. And so I  would think about that with the appliance selection. Manual dexterity and vision, the big -  gest problem here is the whole Herbst thing being PDAC approved and stuff, and that  tends to be kind of a hassle of an appliance to use for people that kind of can't see stuff.  But you don't have a lot of choice if you're going to be working with insurance on that. But  if you're not working with insurance, then you do have choice, and you can figure out what  could this patient use. A Polestyle appliance tends to work really well there, but of course  the patient has to have the retentive features and everything else in order for that to work.  Metal Allergies   [0:18:26]  Metal allergies and sensitivity, remember, do not mess with this. If the patient says that  they are allergic to any metal, stainless steel, stuff like that, and even if you're like, yeah,  but all the mechanism on this is titanium, you're not going to have a problem, I guarantee  you'll have a problem, you just will. So if the patient's like, yeah, I'm real sensitive to metal,  no metal. So that would disqualify them from the Herbst style appliances and move them  towards another. As I am recording this, the only PDAC appliances that don't have metal  would be the Panthera and the Silent Night by Glidewell. Neither of those have any metal  in them. Now again, that will most likely change, so check into that. Don't just take that as  Jamison said on the video that that's true, because these insurance rules change all the  time. Prior experience with oral appliance therapy, as I've mentioned before, this is going  to be the main area where you'll make an appliance that you've never made before, be -  cause someone will come in and they've got a TAP3 and you're like, I've never even seen  that appliance before. And you will be tempted to make them whatever appliance it is that  you like and that your patients seem to like.  [0:19:43]  And I would encourage you to not do that. I would encourage you to make the appliance  that they have worn in the past, that they have great experience with, that has changed  their life, and they are coming to you for a new one. They're not coming to you for a new  appliance, they're coming to you to continue to have the outcome that they've had with  this. So definitely make them that, I mean if they bring up, hey, what's new? Is there any -  thing new out there now? I got this 10 years ago. Then you can say, well yeah, there is,  and here's the benefit of this or that, but then if I were you, I would for sure say, hey  though, since you've had a good experience with this appliance, we could try to make your  new one as close as possible to this as we can, that way you would be the most used to it  and most likely have a similar experience. And if the patient's like, oh, that's a good point,  then I would follow up with this. However, whatever we make, even if we try to make it  09/01/25   Page   of 7   14

SSC 2.0 - 210: Adjusting Oral Appliances  identical to this old appliance that you have, it's not going to feel the same. It's going to be  close, but it's not going to feel the same. It's going to be tighter, there's going to be some  things, you kind of got used to this. You broke this thing in over the however many years  you used this. So patient, just be prepared that when we first pop this in your mouth, it's  going to feel quite different than the appliance you've been wearing for five years. Okay,  give them that pre-heads up.  Current History of TMJ Problems   [0:21:12]  Current history of TMJ problems. I don't worry about the TMJ problems as far as not being  able to treat the patient with oral appliance therapy. As we'll talk in level three about airway  is huge with TMJ problems. These things go together. However, couple of points there is  currently in 2025, there are many, many insurance companies that won't pay for oral appli -  ance therapy if it says somewhere that the patient has a TMJ problem. So remember in  your examination and all that stuff that if they put down that they have any kind of TMJ  problem, whatever that means to them, you need to make a note out there that's like, hey,  this is not active, patient's doing well, whatever. On the other hand, if a patient comes to  you for a TMJ problem, you're getting involved in treating TMJ problems and they come to  you specifically for that, it is appropriate for you to evaluate their airway, ask them the  questions, do you snore? Is anyone noticing you're stopping breathing when you sleep? All  the stuff, do that as part of your comprehensive exam, super duper important.  [0:22:21]  However, if their chief concern is their TMJ problem, don't ignore it. A lot of people have  made that mistake. It's like, oh man, I can't move forward treating this TMJ problem be -  cause I think they might have a sleep apnea problem. Therefore, I better refer them to the  doctor, see if a sleep study is indicated, wait to get the sleep study. Four or five months  down the road, that person then may find out that they do or don't have sleep apnea and  they've either moved on to some other dentist who is willing to put them into braces for  their TMJ problem or equilibrate them or crown all their teeth. They've kind of forgotten  about you because you didn't have that certainty of I can help you with your TMJ problem.  [0:23:02]  If they come in with a chief complaint of a TMJ problem, typically you're going to treat and  focus on their TMJ problem first. Little exception to the rule there is for many of us in the  United States, TMJ problems are not covered by insurance, sleep apnea is. As such, you  will have some people that would love to treat their TMJ problem first, that's the reason  they're there, but they can't really afford to do this without help from their insurance. In  those cases, it's completely appropriate to say, hey, I can help you with your TMJ problem.  We can get started almost immediately. However, if cost is important to you, if how much it  costs you out of pocket is a really big deal to you, there is another option, and that option  would be to send you down a really slow road with insurance and have you checked out  09/01/25   Page   of 8   14

SSC 2.0 - 210: Adjusting Oral Appliances  for obstructive sleep apnea. And if we find that you have obstructive sleep apnea, and if  the doctor feels that oral appliance therapy is appropriate, then we can potentially treat  your TMJ problem and the sleep apnea simultaneously, and that would mostly be covered  by your insurance. What do you think about that?  [0:24:16]  So we have kind of mixed results with that. Our Salt Lake practice, as of now, skews more  TMD because we purchased the TMD practice about seven years ago. That one's a little  bit more TMD. Boise has become more sleep over the years. In Salt Lake, that is exactly  what they do as of today, is they give people that fast track, we can help you with your  TMJ problem and get going immediately, or the slow track. In our Boise practice, a little bit  less TMD, and Dr. Kuehne there will often give people that slow track option with insur -  ance, and a lot of people seem to take that. So it's going to depend on your patient base  and what they care about and stuff like that. Appliance selection-wise, I do like using the  EMA in these cases just as an insurance policy because with those bands, remember, I  want the weak link to be the appliance and not the patient. And you can show the patient,  hey, if you start doing some weird stuff with your jaw that could hurt you, you're going to  stretch these bands. Theoretically, you could even break the bands.  [0:25:28]  You're not going to break yourself. Okay, so that's review. Covered that also in level one.  You could go back and watch that too, but that's a review of everything with appliance se -  lection. Bottom line, best appliance is the one that the patient will actually use, the one  they'll actually wear. Okay, that's the most important thing. The art of this is you getting  good at figuring out what will they wear. And in addition to that, going through the stuff that  we're about to talk about now, which is adjusting the appliance. Because, Frank, not to be  cocky, but I could probably take, dang near any appliance and have it become comfortable  for a patient based on my knowledge of having done this with a million different things over  the years. You are, if you are new to this field, you're coming in with a lot of those lessons  already learned, and you won't have to tinker around with stuff. Like I made lots, hundreds  and hundreds of appliances completely on my own and using suck down material and  acrylic and building it from scratch with acrylic and using Velcro as a connector and all  sorts of stuff, right?  [0:26:39]  You won't do those things, most likely. And there's certain skills and expertise that came  from having to dink around with all that stuff over the years. You're going to jump more into  different appliances, but this is, again, why I strongly encourage you to try a lot of different  appliances so that you get good at what does it feel like to me? What does that feel like in  my mouth? What does it do to my tongue? What does it do to my cheeks? How do you ad -  just that? If it's a little thick, how do you adjust that to make it feel a little thinner? Where  does it matter how thick it is? Where does it matter when it's touching your tongue? All that  sort of stuff. That's going to make you better at helping the patient have an appliance that  they'll actually use.  09/01/25   Page   of 9   14

SSC 2.0 - 210: Adjusting Oral Appliances  Appliance Selection - Simplified   [0:27:22]  All right, as far as appliance selection simplified, the two biggies are the lateral bruxism  and the retention issues. So lateral bruxism, you could use a push appliance, an anterior  pull push, or a pull appliance. Limited retention, push appliance, or an interlocking. Those  are both going to work great with limited retention. So paying attention here, you notice  that the Herbst style appliance is on the top and the bottom. So theoretically, that could be  your one quiver appliance. However, the problem with that is metal. So it's got metal. And  then there's other problems, as I've talked about in other sessions, with that appliance. You  have to stick it in one piece at a time, or all its one piece, I mean, unless you want to take  the bars off, which is a total hassle. So it's not as easy to adjust and to fit as these other  appliances. The initial experience that the patient has is not as good as putting in a single  appliance and having them kind of check that out and feel that for a while and then putting  them in the lower separately and having them check that out and then putting them to -  gether. This one, it's all together. So it goes from nothing in their mouth to a big bunch of  stuff in their mouth right off the bat. That's not always awesome for that first experience.  But that's your selection simplified.  “Dr. Spencer 4+1”   [0:28:20]  On my starting four plus one, What I mean on this slide here is that you need to be com -  fortable with all of your normal mechanisms of action except monoblock. I don't have any  monoblocks here other than the temporary that I have pictured here is technically a  monoblock. But again, I would encourage you to have a Herbst or two that you like, have  an interlocking or two that you like, have an anterior pull pusher too that you like, have a  couple pulls that you have experience with, that's going to hit it. And then a temporary de -  vice, again, 2025 and beyond, getting less important because of printing appliances and  things like that, but to have some tool in your toolbox.  [0:29:27]  Mostly your use for temporary appliances won't be what you think. So you would typically  think the temporary appliance is going to be used to like, see if it's going to work. That's  usually not the case. So usually the case that you're going to use a temporary appliance is  someone has an appliance and they lost it or a dog ate it. That's where you're going to pull  out a temporary appliance. And that's why it's important to have myTAPs in your cabinet or  a EMA now or other options as the silent sleep that I invented years and years and years  ago. To have something that, hey, my dog ate my appliance. I'm going away on a business  trip tomorrow. I'm speaking. If I'm not sleeping, this is going to be devastating to me. What  can you do for me literally today? Okay, so if you only have the ability to make them a new  09/01/25   Page   of 10   14

SSC 2.0 - 210: Adjusting Oral Appliances  appliance and you can't print it in-house, that's a week or more for them to wait. That  stinks.  [0:30:29]  So make sure that you have temporary appliances. And again, the patient's going to be  super duper grateful and it's really not going to matter how big of a difference is. The cool  thing with a temporary device in that scenario that I just gave you there, they already know  the position that works. So you can find that position and say, okay, right about there. Does  that feel about right? Yeah, that's where my other appliance was. It's going to work. The  odds of that temporary appliance having a positive effect for them are super duper high.  Okay, so the four normal, drop my sling here, the four normal mechanisms of action, not  monoblocks, don't worry about those, and some temporary.  Fitting   [0:31:04]  Okay, let's talk about fitting now in a little bit more detail. So one of the reasons I chose  this picture for fitting and we have the model there and she's having that custom gown  made for her and please remember, and I'm going to reinforce this multiple times, but  please remember that all of these appliances are custom. They are one of a kind. They've  never been done before except for that person, right? And for the fitting, there's certain  things that we're going to go through every time, but reinforce this with the patient that this  is like having a custom dress made. This is like having a custom suit made, that there is  measurements that have to be taken very precisely and then there's still some alterations  of that even after we've made it as precise as possible. Okay, this is not just, here you go,  pop it in, it should feel perfect from the get-go.  Prior to the Appointment   [0:32:02]  Prior to the appointment, we check that we have the appliance in house at least a day in  advance, check that it looks nice and it's what you're expecting. Look at the models that  the appliance is made on and you remember when I went over that before, that that is kind  of old school. So the broken teeth and all that kind of stuff, that's more traditional made  appliances that are thermoformed or that are made out of acrylic. But that probably doesn't  even help you anymore because models in 2025 are printed. They are almost never  poured in stone. I don't know any labs that are pouring in stone anymore. And so the print -  ed models, dang near never break. So you're not going to have that same ability. If you  were working with a lab or you're doing it in house, you could certainly do that on stone.  [0:32:50]  The advantage of doing it on stone is if the technician did not block out in certain areas  when they are wrenching that tray off, teeth will break off. And then you can visually look  09/01/25   Page   of 11   14

SSC 2.0 - 210: Adjusting Oral Appliances  and go, oh, look, all the lower teeth are broken off, that the lower anterior teeth are all bro -  ken off. I guarantee you it's going to be tight in that area. It just kind of goes together. Oth -  erwise, there's not that direct correlation that we have had in the past and particularly with  printed or milled appliances, then the printed and milled appliance has actually nothing to  do with the model because it was printed and then the model was printed, but the appli -  ance itself was not made on the model. So just kind of keep that stuff in mind as you're go -  ing through this, because that can be a little confusing too, especially as you start using  different appliances, you're using nylon appliances, let's say that are printed. You're like  trying on models and stuff and you're using these kind of older thought processes because  of how we used to make things and trying to apply that to this newer printing and literally  have nothing to do with each other.  Could Some Bulk be Reduced?   [0:34:02]  Lastly, look, see if there can be some bulk reduce, things like that. That one too, be a little  bit careful with. So if it's like, yeah, it's a little bit bulky, see how smooth the appliance is.  Smooth will tend to trump bulky to a degree. Rough or not smooth is really annoying. So if  people can feel it with their tongue, with their cheeks or whatever, if it's glass smooth but a  little bit bigger, that'll tend to feel better than slightly rough and smaller. Okay, now that'll  depend on the patient, but my warning there is don't just, and particularly with your team  members, don't teach them to just automatically grind on these appliances because most  of them, if you get a laboratory fabricated appliance, it's going to tend to be way smooth.  They do a great job with that and it's possible you may not be able to get that as smooth  as they did with using the things that you have available to you and then it'll be all smooth  except for that one spot that the assistant adjusted it and that can be really frustrating.  Okay, so be careful with that.  Wrap the Distal!   [0:35:20]  So one of the things we want to look for is we want to wrap the distal of the most distal  lower tooth. Okay, it's not wrap like that, right? It's wrap the distal of the most lower tooth.  The most common area of tooth movement is between the first and second molar on the  bottom. So you note here I've kind of marked that second molar with some marker here  and showing that the appliance wraps around that. Now, you don't always have models  like that, do you? You don't always have the ability to get around that distal. If you can't,  then you can't. But whenever you can, please do. Laboratories will not usually wrap the  distal of the most distal tooth because it makes it harder for you to seat it. And totally true,  it will make it harder for you to seat it, but it's also going to keep the teeth together, right?  [0:36:14]  09/01/25   Page   of 12   14

SSC 2.0 - 210: Adjusting Oral Appliances  So I would rather you have to do some adjustments and figure out just the right amount  there to be able to wrap it to still seat it, but there will be occasions where you can't do  that. If you can't wrap the distal, then that's just another case of really teaching that patient  the floss like a boss principle there and say, hey, particularly your farthest back teeth, I  need you to snap, snap, snap, snap. And if one day it's like slide, slide, it's not snap, snap  anymore, you need to call me because that could mean that those teeth are moving. Okay,  so that's the wrap the distal. Before we fit the appliance, we're going to tell the patient what  we're going to do. We're going to tell them it's going to be very tight and that it's going to  be probably pretty darn uncomfortable. Again, I know a lot of dentists don't like saying stuff  like that to their patient, but you're trying to lower expectations. You want them to be pre -  pared for this. And then if it's not that tight, if it's not uncomfortable, then they're happy.  And remember, I also talked about actually if they've got any restorations of pointing out to  them, say, hey, remind me here. If it's your patient, then you would know. But let's say it's a  patient's been referred in from a sleep doctor.  [0:37:23]  Hey, I see you've got a couple of crowns on the bottom there. How old are those? If you  remember, geez, that one I got in college. I'm now 45. That's like, I don't know, 20, 25  years old probably. Okay, glad I asked. So the reason I asked is the cements that dentists  have used over the years have changed, and the original cements that you would have  had back there in 25 years ago, it's possible they can actually wash out. Sometimes they  don't, but they can, and you would never know this unless there's a problem. Now, this ap -  pliance, though, is made very precisely to fit around that, and it's going to be tight. And  maybe when we take this off, if that cement has dissolved over the years, this won't be the  why, but it's going to be the when. This isn't why this crown is about to come off, but it will  be the when.  [0:38:16]  And having that little quick dialogue, now they're going to be there and concerned. In the  chair, they're going to be like, oh, shoot. And you put that in, you take it off, and then if  there's no crown, they're going to be pretty happy about that. And one in a 500, maybe one  in 1,000 times, it is going to pull a crown off. And if you're a real dentist, you're like, no big  deal. You check out their tooth and make sure everything's cool and re-cement it. If you're  practiced like ours, we have temporary cement that we have in, and then we send that pa -  tient back to their dentist and have them check it out and make sure everything's okay be -  fore they re-cement it or if they have to make a new crown. If they make a new crown,  since we'd already have that appliance made on that crown, we try to make sure that the  new crown is the same as that one, right? So they can scan that and have the new crown  that's made be basically exactly or extremely close to that old crown. Okay, so that's the  tightness issue.  Before Fitting the Appliance   [0:39:13]  09/01/25   Page   of 13   14

SSC 2.0 - 210: Adjusting Oral Appliances  Tell the patient you're going to adjust any spots that are uncomfortable, but that it's very  important they let you know of anything that's bothering them, quote, because if it bothers  you here, it's going to bother you a lot more at 2 a.m., okay? Use this judiciously. If you  have the patient that is the princess and the pea person and they're already telling you  everything, you don't really need to say this phrase, but the person that is like, you know,  how is that? Fine. Any problems at all? No. If they don't give you any feedback at all, then  you might have to pick a little bit. Again, the best appliance is the one they'll wear, and if  there's any comfort issue at all, they won't wear it. And sometimes those guys that are kind  of just being the, they won't give you that feedback, in their head, they may be looking for  a reason to not wear it. So you want to take that away from them and make sure that it is  comfortable. Tell the patient it usually takes most patients a few weeks to get used to  wearing the appliance through the night. Most of your patients, it will not take a few weeks,  but this is again lowering expectations so that when they don't sleep through the night with  the full, you know, the sleep through full night with the appliance the first night, they're not  disappointed.  [0:40:23]  When they are contacted for their first follow-up, whether that be in person or via telemedi -  cine or something, typically the first thing we'll ask is, hey, were you able to wear your ap -  pliance through the night at least once? And usually the vast majority of patients will be  like, yeah, I've been wearing it through the night since the first night. Hey, good for you.  That's awesome. Sometimes it takes people a lot longer to get used to it. You did a good  job. Way to go. Okay, so give them a little bit of an attaboy there. But every once in a  while, you'll have a person like, yeah, man, I've really struggled. I haven't been able to  wear it through the whole night. Hey, don't worry about it. We told you it takes a little while  to get used to. What is bothering you about it? And that's going to be our entire focus to -  day. Okay, that's a way better conversation to be having with the patient than them thinking  that there's no way they can use this. So tell them in advance.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 14   14

