SSC 2.0 - 211: ABC's of Fitting  SSC 2.0   Level 2  211: ABC's of Fitting  [intro music]  Fitting Basics (Adjust the Fit)   [0:00:12]  Now let's talk about the ABCs of fitting, and these are going to apply to most appliances on  the market. So A is adjust the fit. That's A. Fit the upper tray. I like to do the upper tray first  and then the lower tray. Of course, if you have a push-style appliance or herbst-style ap -  pliance, then you've got to do it as one piece, which is a bit of a hassle. Fit the upper tray.  Take care of any comfort issues. If it's too tight, adjust it. If it's too loose, fix it, but first  make sure it's seated. Lots of times, and especially once you get your assistants doing  this, they'll put it in and it won't quite be seated all the way, but they'll start to make adjust -  ments to it even though it's not seated all the way. So make darn sure the appliance is  seated first before you start fiddling with tight or loose, because obviously if it's not seated  all the way, you don't really know if it's tight or loose.  [0:01:14]  We'll talk about the how to tighten and loosen in just a minute, but that's kind of first thing  is comfort, of course, and then having the appropriate level of tightness. Now, all the appli -  ances need to be tight enough that they don't pop off, and one of the bummers with loos -  ening an appliance is you tend to go loose and loose and loose, and then it just falls out,  right? And then it's like, oh, crud. So this will take some experience, and this is one of the  pros, actually, to having your assistants do this, is they'll get good at it with more reps, and  you can be doing your thing, and the assistants will get really good at fitting the appli -  ances. Okay, next, we fit the lower tray, take care of any comfort issues. If it's too tight, ad -  just it, too loose, fix it, make sure it is seated. So upper first, then the lower, that's adjust  the fit.  Fitting Basics (Balance)   [0:02:02]  Okay, next, balance. Put both trays in and check that they're hitting on both sides, okay?  So just, again, remember that I don't really care if you've got the patient leaning back, if  you've got them forward, wherever you want to put them in the chair is fine, because their  bite at home is going to be different on the appliance, and all you're looking for is does it  hit on both sides? Not does it hit evenly, but does it hit on both sides? Okay, if it doesn't,  then adjust. Well, how do you know it doesn't? So number one, ask, and then number two,  09/01/25   Page   of 1   15

SSC 2.0 - 211: ABC's of Fitting  look. So if you ask and they're like, yeah, it hits harder on the left, I would also look. And if  you look in and you're like, well, I see contact on the right, so cool, so we're close. And  then you can use articulating paper or whatever you want to do in order to fine tune where  you're going to adjust so you're not just grinding randomly there, right? If, on the other  hand, they say, yeah, it's hitting harder on the left, and you look in and it's not hitting at all  on the right, then you know you've got an idea of how much you're going to need to take  down or you may decide, actually, I'm going to build up the right instead of taking down the  left. Typically, as I talked about in an earlier session, I like to go lower vertical whenever  possible because I want it just super easy for the patient to close their lips around the ap -  pliance and not to take away their freeway space so that they're resting on the appliance.  So typically, almost, almost always you're going to be lowering that vertical to get the con -  tacts. Once in a while it will make sense for you to add a little bit on one side that's more  about vertical. We'll talk more about vertical later, but that's going to be rare, okay, that  you're going to do that.  Fitting Basics (Check the Initial Jaw Position)   [0:03:49]  Next, we have C is for check the initial jaw position. So we've got the trays now. They're  hitting on both sides. Now we're going to activate it in some way, either put on bands, ad -  just the fin position, turn the screw, whatever you're doing, you're going to make it active.  Look and make sure that the appliance is actually active. So that means that the bands  are stretched. They're not folded. It means that on an interlocking appliance that the things  are touching. It means on a herbst style appliance that the arm of the herbst isn't protruded  forward because the patient can. They can always move it forward if they want to, but that  it's stopped. It's not going back anymore. That would indicate that it's active.  [0:04:39]  Play with all the different appliances that you use so that you can readily see and teach  your staff this too if it is doing something or not doing something. Then we do tend to lay  the patient back for this one and they don't have to be full flat. They could just be back a  little bit. Tell them to relax their jaw. Relax their lower jaw. Don't hold it forward on their  own. Just let the appliance do it. Let the appliance do the work. Relax your jaw. Then ask,  does it feel like it's doing nothing at all? It's jacking your jaw way forward or it's keeping  your jaw from falling backwards? Those are the three questions. Our goal, of course, is it's  keeping my jaw from falling backwards. Don't lead the witness. Don't tell them, hey, that  feels good, right? It feels like it's keeping your jaw from falling backwards, right? Don't do  that. So ask them the question that makes them think, does it feel like it's not doing any -  thing at all? Does it feel like it's really just jacking your jaw forward? It's probably not doing  that, right? You would have seen that just two seconds ago. Still ask, and then the last  thing you ask is, okay, and here's our goal. Does it feel like it's keeping your jaw from fall -  ing backwards? Okay, so those are the ABCs of fittings.  09/01/25   Page   of 2   15

SSC 2.0 - 211: ABC's of Fitting  Appliance Too Tight?   [0:05:43]  All right, now what do we do if the appliance is too tight? Well, if it's at one spot, and you  hope it is, have them point with one finger to where it's tight. One finger. If it's in a general  area, then we're going to focus on the embrasures. Okay, so the in-between the teeth. Part  of the reason that it feels tight is it's separating the teeth. So for example, my lower appli -  ance, my lower teeth are a little bit crooked, and so that plastic will go in between the teeth  and spread them out a little bit, and that's uncomfortable until the PDL adjusts to that and  my teeth spread out just that little bit. To adjust that, I would go in and just kind of zip off  the embrasures, and then that's not going to be a problem. Okay, what if it's not making  sense on where it's tight? Then check the models if you got that traditional appliance that  was made on models, or look at the scans if digital.  [0:06:45]  Okay, so you can look at the   scans, you can look at the STL of the appliance that was  made for you, look around at it and be like, okay, this isn't making a lot of sense. Now on  the too tight, just be warned again that it tends to go too tight, too tight, too tight, falling  out. So you'll want to go very gingerly, and also don't be too quick. So here's probably the  biggest mistake with tight, is you or your staff will adjust it, and then you pop it in and be  like, how's that now? Okay, just like when we're fitting it, we need to give some time for the  PDL to react. Okay, so when you first put it in, give that whole dialogue of it's going to feel  tight, probably very uncomfortable, and then your tissues, your teeth actually going to  move just a little bit, and that's going to feel better in just a little bit here. So we're going to  pop that in, just let you kind of sit for a second. And the patient will then have that experi -  ence, and they'll put it in and be like, oh, that is tight, just like they said.  [0:07:50]  And then in 10 seconds, it's like, well, that's not so bad. And then in 30 seconds, it's like,  that's all right. Okay, so give them that time. And then when you adjust it, same thing,  they're like, yeah, it's tight right here. Adjust, pop it in, say, all right, let's give that a second.  Let's give that a few seconds to set for a minute. How's that now? Okay, so give them that  time. Don't just pop it in and be how's that. If you do that, then you're chasing this a lot  more than you need to. And that's where we tend to go from tight, tight, tight, falling out.  Okay? Okay, remember that? Teach that to your staff. Give the tissues time to respond be -  fore you ask the question. Teach the patient what you're looking for.  Appliance Too Loose?   [0:08:37]  What about it's too loose? All right, so we checked confirm that it's seated first. That is  most important. Check fit on the models if it is traditional. Decide if you want to try to make  09/01/25   Page   of 3   15

SSC 2.0 - 211: ABC's of Fitting  it more retentive or if a different design would be better. Now, sometimes here you're going  to be like, oops, I made a mistake. This person has short clinical crowns. They're missing  some lower posterior teeth. Darn it, I didn't even think about that. I gave them a pole appli -  ance. This is just not going to work. I gave them an anterior pull push. Their front teeth are  totally vertical. There's nothing to grab on there. It's just popping out like crazy. There's no  way I can make this tighter.  [0:09:19]  Sometimes it's going to be like my bad. That should have been a push style appliance.  That should have been an interlocking appliance. And every once in a while as a beginner  particularly, you're going to eat an appliance and just like, hey, my bad. That was not a  good choice for you because of how your teeth are. And now you hopefully only make that  mistake once because it costs you money and time and the patient's not happy and you're  not happy. No one's happy about this. And so then from then on out, you'd be like, okay,  short clinical crowns, you get an interlocking unless you're a lateral bruxer and then you  get a push. And that's just the way it goes. Okay, so that's what you're going to look at for  loose. Now, what if you've got a printed nylon appliance, then that's a major hassle.  [0:10:06]  What you can do in that case, and we have videos in the video how to library on this, is  you can boil it and pinch it. I don't love that and neither will you because really what we're  doing when we do that is we are creating inaccuracies to kind of go in and grab stuff. And  when we do that, we're making orthodontic appliances that are trying to move the teeth.  So it's never my preference. Loosening appliances, we're not doing that. But when we're  tightening appliances, we're usually going to be doing things that make it less accurate. An  exception to this would be if you're tightening an acrylic appliance using acrylic. So you  can flow in some acrylic, put it on their teeth. It's going to find every nook and cranny to  grab onto. And then that is going to be way tighter. Heads up, and you've probably already  thought this through here, you could lock it on. So if you do that, and I would imagine that  a lot of dentists nowadays don't even have cold cure acrylic in their office anymore, or  there's some bottle that was there from the dude you brought the practice from that's 20  years old, you're not even sure it's going to work, it'll work.  [0:11:24]  But if we're talking liquid and powder acrylic, cold cure acrylic, and you put it in there and  you will tighten it that way. Tastes awful, you're putting a nail salon in the person's mouth.  There may be some people that not only object to that, but they're like, did you just do  something super duper toxic to me? So I would not necessarily have that be my go-to. We  used to put acrylic in people's mouths all the flipping time with TMJ appliances and to  tighten appliances and stuff like that. I think we're kind of getting away from that because it  is kind of an awful experience and then you could have the horrific experience of locking it  on their teeth. So probably if it is too loose, you might consider remaking it, letting the labo -  ratory know that you need it to engage those undercuts better, or looking at even a differ -  ent appliance design if part of that looseness is because of your fault of not recognizing  that they had short clinical crowns. Okay, so we can do it with acrylic, but I don't know that  09/01/25   Page   of 4   15

SSC 2.0 - 211: ABC's of Fitting  you're going to do that. So one of the things that we need to get better at is choosing the  right appliance in the first place. And when we think there's going to be a retention issue,  then don't give them an appliance that requires retention. Okay, move towards that push or  that interlocking that doesn't require as much retention.  Tightening a Loose Appliance (Hot Water)   [0:12:55]  So how do we tighten a loose appliance? Now I'm going to give some basic principles and  then it's going to depend a ton on what the appliance is made out of, of course. So let's  talk about vacuform appliances that still there's plenty of vacuformed appliances and you  may be making these in-house or you have the ability to make these in-house. So that  would be like your EMA, a Silent Night. There are certain tap models that are made with  vacuform, certain Herbst models that are made with vacuform. So anything that was a  vacuformed appliance, then typically how we're going to tighten this is hot water, dimpling  pliers, or adding acrylic. On hot water, it's as you would assume, it just heat up and trying  to only heat up the part of the appliance that needs to be more tight.  [0:13:52]  You don't typically put the whole thing in the hot water because it's going to have a ten -  dency. So by putting a vacuformed appliance in hot water, what's it going to have a ten -  dency to do? Flatten out, right? So remember that material was once upon a time a flat  disc and then it was vacuformed over something. So it's going to have a tendency to flat -  ten out by heating it. So it's going to be pinching it. Now how you can typically do this is  pinching it onto the models and kind of pushing it into those embrasures, into those under -  cuts. If that's not sufficient, then you can just pinch it off of the models in those areas and  that will give a little bit more of a grab. You could then maybe let it cool a little bit, put it on  and off the models once or twice so you don't want it to be too tight. But getting that ability  to pinch that in, this is going to be mostly posterior that you're going to be making it more  tight. Anterior is usually not going to be a problem. So it's usually going to be the tightness.  [0:14:56]  We want to get this in the back teeth. If I haven't mentioned this already, with tightness, I  don't believe I did mention this earlier, tightness on the front teeth is far more bothersome  to a patient than tightness on the back teeth. My theory on that is because the front teeth  have single roots and so a single rooted tooth kind of being moved in any direction is un -  comfortable, whereas a multi-rooted tooth, your body just doesn't respond to it that same  way. So try to have the front teeth. The front teeth a lot of times will barely have a touch in  the teeth. People don't like to have that pressure on their front teeth. The back teeth on the  other hand can handle it. So if I'm going to try to have an appliance be tighter, I'm going to  try to tighten it on those back teeth.  09/01/25   Page   of 5   15

SSC 2.0 - 211: ABC's of Fitting  Tightening a Loose Appliance (Dimpling Pliers)   [0:15:45]  Talking about a dimpling applier. So the dimpling appliers are to put in a little bit of a bump  on the internal aspect of that appliance. And this is one that you can buy on Amazon. And  then note, if you can kind of see this, you might need to look at this on a bigger screen or  blow this up, but this we have ground off. So these pliers are for putting a dimple into met -  al. And so it's not a dental instrument, if you will, but it's very affordable and you can just  trim off that extra metal there because you need this part here to be small enough or shal -  low enough that you can put it in to be able to end up getting your dimple right around the  embrasure of that between the first and second molar, between the pre-molar and the first  molar. That's where you're going for is in between those embrasures. Now you may be  familiar with dimpling pliers like this that are used for aligners like Invisalign trays, stuff like  that. They can be used, just the difficulty is that the materials for the oral appliance tend to  be much thicker, so they may not be robust enough to do that. However, if you were to  heat the plastic and then use that dimpling tool that you have for aligners, that probably  will work. So you can just kind of experiment with that. But we've used these for years and  it works pretty good. Now remember, this is only going to work on vacuum-formed material  and maybe nylon, but will absolutely not work on acrylic, 3D printed acrylic, or cold-cure  acrylic, because those have no flex and you will just break it.  [0:17:41]  So be careful using a dimpling tool. You need a material that can be compressed, that can  be molded, changed, modified without it being brittle. So most of your 3D printed materials  and your 3D acrylics anyway, so your 3D acrylics and your cold-cure acrylics, you can't  heat that up and bend it, right? So anything that you could heat up and bend is going to  lend itself to the dimpling plier. Anything that if you heat it up, you still couldn't bend it, is  just going to break if you tried this. So no acrylic appliances with this at all. Nylon, it does  work. So same thing, so nylon or vacuum-formed, you can heat that up and then pinch it  and that's going to be how you tighten that appliance.  Acrylic Appliances (Add Acrylic)   [0:18:38]  Now if it has clasp, then obviously you're going to adjust the clasp. I can't remember the  last time we used an appliance with clasps, so this is not usually a thing. If for some rea -  son you wanted to use an acrylic appliance and you had a patient with short clinical  crowns and you're thinking, I probably need clasp in this case, then ask. And any lab worth  their salt is going to be able to put in some clasps. You can put in a clasp after the fact, it's  a hassle, and you would have to know what you're doing on that. People that are really  good at this stuff, by the way, are orthodontists. So if you have a local orthodontist and  they have an in-house lab or they have a local orthodontic lab, those people are awesome  at this sort of thing. So you could have an appliance modified if you needed to. Again, al -  09/01/25   Page   of 6   15

SSC 2.0 - 211: ABC's of Fitting  ways better to just decide the stuff in advance of what you're going to need than to be  messing around with this. Typically with an acrylic appliance, we're going to tighten it by  adding acrylic. I already talked about why you may not do that, the whole nail salon in the  mouth stuff, things like that. That's something definitely to consider. You can use other ma -  terials. We've tried everything over the years with light cure material and stuff like that. Just  in general, none of it's awesome. Tends to discolor the appliance. Just, again, not great,  which is why we try to get this right in the first place whenever possible.  Did You Know?   [0:20:07]  Did you know that acrylic won't bond to the soft liner of the soft hard appliances? So if  you're using, for example, a silent night with a Glidewell hinge, kind of a confusing name,  but it's the silent night group of products with the Glidewell hinge. That's the Herbst, the  Herbst by Glidewell. That is typically made. It can be made differently if you want it made  differently, but typically that's going to be made with the hard soft material. If you've ever  done a night guard with Glidewell, I believe they call it their comfort hard soft. If you've  done that with the hard outside and the soft inside, that's the material. So it's that same  material that you formed over the teeth and that soft liner, you can't bond acrylic to it. It'll  just come off of that soft liner. However, what you can do, and most people aren't aware of  this, so this applies to anything with that soft liner, is you can take out the soft liner. So how  you do that is you would take like a Explorer and kind of start putting it in between the hard  and the soft layer and then get some acrylic monomer, assuming you have that, and drip it  into the crack between the soft and the hard.  [0:21:22]  Once you've separated that just a little bit, once you can get that acrylic monomer in there,  that acrylic monomer will just release that adhesion between the soft and the hard and it'll  peel right out and then you'll be left with an acrylic appliance. Then you would have to flow  something into it and that could be acrylic. Be careful, don't lock it on the teeth. It could be  Thermacryl that will warm up. You can warm it up with hot water and take it in and out, in  and out and stuff like that. You could do some sort of like your material, stuff like that.  Again, we haven't had good luck with that, but you could try that. Now, once again, a lot of  this kind of arts and crafts stuff is to a degree going out the window because if you had a  printed appliance and you had an issue with this, you would just reprint it. So if you did a  3D printed EMA and it was too loose, you would go back into your settings and make it  tighter and just do another one. It would not be worth your time and effort to try to go  through all of the stuff that I'm describing here to make that tighter.  [0:22:27]  Plus, it's not as cool for the patient. Going through and boiling and pinching and stuff like  that, even though a lot of this would be kind of done behind the patient, the patient's not  watching you do this manipulation of the materials. So it's fine to adjust the appliance. I  09/01/25   Page   of 7   15

SSC 2.0 - 211: ABC's of Fitting  think that's actually important. It's this, again, even if you've got the custom suit, the cus -  tom dress, there may be some little minor alterations, and that would be expected, okay?  So I don't think an appliance just has to fall in and never be touched, but on the other  hand, a lot of adjustment to it will start to make the patient think, hmm, what's wrong with  this? Why is this taking an hour to fit this and get it right?  Adjusting Vertical   [0:23:13]  All right, what about vertical? So we've got tight, loose, and making our correct decisions  on that. What about vertical? So the question, this initial idea here of vertical is this is a  scenario where you have them bite down, right? When you've got the upper tray adjusted,  you've got the lower tray adjusted, you put it together, tap, tap, tap, and they're hitting  harder on one side. Then you're going to decide, so which would be easier for you to do?  Would it be reduce the high side or build up the low side?  [0:23:50]  Now, before you make your decision, so that might be clear. So taking down or adding,  looking at the appliance, you might be like, okay, well, it's going to be easier to reduce, or  it's going to be easier to add in this case. So let me give you a scenario here. So it's al -  most always easier to reduce the vertical on a pull style appliance as long as it has the oc -  clusal pads like an EMA would, whereas a silent night, for example, that does not have the  occlusal pads, it depends on how much contact you have and how much you would have  to take down on one side to get the other side to hit. So those are some of the things  you're going to take into account. On the other hand, a interlocking style appliance where  we've got flat planes that are touching each other, those are usually a little easier to add to  the side that's deficient, if you will, because taking it down is a real hassle and you can't  easily do that with the easiest one to do it with is anything that has posterior pads, those  are easy to adjust the vertical.  [0:25:02]  So that's your initial thought process of which one's going to be easier for me to do. But  then the next thought process is what does the patient think? So before you change verti -  cal, ask the patient, does the appliance feel too tall or too small? That's your question.  Does it feel too tall, too high or too small, not high enough? Okay, now thinking about 1%  occlusion here, we don't typically want to take away that freeway space because then  even someone like myself, who's a 1% occluder, if you make it high enough after a point, I  got no choice but to bite on that thing, right? You put something in my mouth like this, I'm  gonna have to rest on it because I just can't open my mouth bigger than that and still be at  rest, right? So I'm going to rest, if you will, on this big vertical thing you gave me there. And  as soon as I do that, I'm going to be tightening my muscles of my elevators because  they're not used to having that tooth contact, or it's not tooth contact, but stuff between my  teeth.  09/01/25   Page   of 8   15

SSC 2.0 - 211: ABC's of Fitting  [0:26:11]  So the way it works for me is as soon as I touch my teeth together, bang, those muscles  are gonna activate. We did this in level one, but just real quick, if you put your teeth to -  gether, put your fingers on your masseter, bring your teeth together slowly, and for a lot of  you, the second your teeth touch, and you don't really need to put that much pressure on,  you start to do a little bit of pressure and you're gonna feel that muscle contract under your  fingers. For those of you, you're like, no, it takes actually quite a bit of pressure before I  actually feel a contraction, you're probably more of a clencher. You probably spend more  time with your teeth together. And so that reaction of the muscles are toned down a bit be -  cause it's not uncommon for you to have your teeth together. For me, it's relatively un -  common for me to have my teeth together. I only do that when I chew or swallow. So that's  when those muscles are gonna activate. So for me, if it's taller and I touch on it, I'm gonna  have activation of my masseter, my temporalis muscle, my medial pterygoid that I normally  don't have.  [0:27:20]  That could and probably would lead to some muscle tenderness because I'm not used to  that. Okay, remember me talking about couch to 5K stuff? That's a person that's starting to  use muscles that hasn't and that could cause some muscle tension there. So watch for  that. So as a rule of thumb, I want the appliance as low as possible so that we don't get  into that freeway space stuff and so they can close their lips. That's the thing. However,  having said all that, you will have patients from time to time that like it taller and they'll tell  you. And so is it too small or does it feel too tall? Too small. So you want it kind of taller?  Yeah, yeah, I'd like that a little bit taller. I've had a couple patients over the years that they  wanted the appliance super high and we added acrylic, added acrylic. So I'd start off with  like tongue depressors back there until you get to the point where like, oh, that feels good.  Okay, what's the most important thing about the appliance? That they'll wear it. Okay, so  even every once in a while you'll have a case where you're like, that's nuts to have it that  tall, but the patient's asking you for it.  [0:28:28]  You can even say, wow, that seems crazy high, but if that feels good to you, let's try it. We  can take it down if we need to, but if that feels really good to you, I'm willing to try it if you  are. And the patient will be like, yeah, heck yeah, let's try it. That feels good. Cool. And  again, I've had a couple cases where seriously, like this high and the patient's like, yeah,  that feels great. And they did fine. Okay, so they tend to know what they want. So be care -  ful on the vertical before you start changing too tall, too small, because if you did decide,  well, this is going to be way easier to build up on this side and you build it up on that side,  and then the patient's like, her hair's changed really high, or they can't close your lips  around it or whatever, then you're going to be cutting it down anyway.  Ideally… Have a Good Lip Seal   [0:29:16]  09/01/25   Page   of 9   15

SSC 2.0 - 211: ABC's of Fitting  Okay, lip seal, super duper, duper, duper important for most people. The people that it  would be less important for actually need to learn how to breathe correctly, because the  people would be less important for are people that don't breathe through their nose in the  first place, so they are mouth breathers.  [0:29:37]  And why are they mouth breathers? Because they can't breathe through their nose. And  your brain is smart enough to not have you die just because you're not breathing appropri -  ately through your nose. So lip seal for the vast majority of people is not only important,  but kind of a deal breaker if they don't have it. If you can't close your lips around the appli -  ance comfortably, not with strain, but comfortably, you will probably open and that will  probably dry out your mouth at least. Think of like when you have a cold and you can't  breathe through your nose and you breathe through your mouth, it's miserable, isn't it?  And your mouth gets all dry and you just don't feel like you're breathing well and stuff. It's  awful. So watch for that. Now there's a couple of appliances on the market where the  manufacturer makes kind of a big deal about having enough material in the back and why  they do that. I understand why they do that, but they do that so that it's less likely to break  at the second molar area.  [0:30:40]  And I totally get where they're coming from, but I don't care. Okay, so what is more impor -  tant that the patient will wear the appliance or that it won't break at the second molar?  Well, clearly that they'll wear it because if they're not wearing it, it's never gonna break the  second molar anyway, right? So I'd like to have the option for it to break at the second mo -  lar someday. So I would rather have it lower and have them have lip seal. We used a spe -  cific appliance in a course that I did around the country and it was because this group, I'm  trying to be careful how I say this, but this group had a kind of a special relationship with  this one appliance. And so anyway, so we would go and I would have 12, 15, 20 people  fitting this appliance on each other in this course and it was very common. I would say at  least 25% of the people that they would close down and I couldn't close her lips. And that's  because in my opinion, the appliance was too thick at the second molar area.  [0:31:48]  Now, if   that, these were dentists that were doing this training, most of them didn't have  sleep apnea. They were only kind of going through this as a, just as an experience. But if  those would have been my patients, then I would have adjusted it right there. With these  dentists, I just said, hey try that, give it a try. And I was kind of, I didn't say, oh, well, that's  never gonna work. So if they can't get their lips around it, you could still have them try it,  but just think to yourself, oh man, I bet the person's gonna have a problem with this be -  cause it's too tall. I've had multiple patients where just based on their curve of speed and  just their bite and how it works that they have to touch. So in order to get it low enough, in  order for them to have lip seal, you are second molar, second molar, and there's no plastic  on the second molars. Now don't freak out on that. You're like, oh crap, if I don't cover the  second molars, then their teeth are gonna super erupt. Well, why? So why would they su -  per erupt?  09/01/25   Page   of 10   15

SSC 2.0 - 211: ABC's of Fitting  [0:32:55]  Because they're gonna touch each other. So it has however much they were touching  each other before, they still are. And the only way their teeth would super erupt is if you  had them wearing that appliance also during the day. And obviously you're not gonna do  that. So don't worry about that either, where we would have an issue there if we've had to  uncover completely the second molar would be that tooth movement issue because we're  pulling away, that tooth's not covered. Nevertheless, don't let those things be the things  that worry you at first. The most important thing is that the patient will wear it. Then we can  deal with this stuff down the road if we need to, but we're never gonna get down the road if  they won't wear it because they can't close their lips around it. Okay, hopefully that makes  the point that I'm going for there.  Appliance Modifications   [0:33:52]  What about modifications to the appliance? I'll start with kind of the last thing there on the  warranty. If you are working with a typical appliance manufacturer, be prepared that you  doing dang near anything will void the warranty. Personally, I couldn't care less about that  because it doesn't matter if there's a warranty if the patient's not wearing it. So I'm going to  do what I'm going to do. And then if someday, I can count on two hands probably the num -  ber of manufacturer warranties that we've ever had to even deal with. So I don't even think  about that at all. But just if you're thinking about that, then be aware that if you did some of  these things, it could void the warranty. Again, who cares if the patient's not going to wear  it? Wearing it is the most important thing. So some of the things that we could do to kind of  modify it a little bit, resetting the mechanism for additional advancement. Depending on  the appliance you're working with, this might be a send it back to the lab and let them do it.  But if you've got some reasonable arts and crafts skills yourself, then you could potentially  move the bars. You could change button position. If you had buttons, you can do different  things in order to allow greater protrusion.  Modify EMA Appliances   [0:35:06]  Now let's talk about a few ways to adapt or modify the EMA style and appliance. And real -  ly, this is only going to be for the EMA and then only certain types of EMA.   So what I'm go -  ing to talk about here is for a EMA appliance that is made using thermoforming, maybe 3D  printed if you could bond acrylic to it, but frankly, that won't make sense if you're 3D print -  ing. So 3D printing, you're just going to make another appliance typically is going to be the  most affordable and most predictable way to do something rather than acrylic. So this is  more just an idea of doing it with a thermoform appliance. And I think thermoform type  EMA is going to be around for many, many years because it's a very affordable way to do  09/01/25   Page   of 11   15

SSC 2.0 - 211: ABC's of Fitting  it. And you can do this in office. And if you're a member of Spencer Study Club that's out -  side the United States, this might be a great way to do it so you don't have to be working  with US-based labs or other labs. You can do this all in-house. All right, so here's the deal.  Sometimes with a pull-style appliance, but particularly an EMA, since the EMA bands are  elastic, they will stretch out. And again, that's a feature, not a flaw, but in this case, it could  be a flaw if the patient keeps stretching them out.  [0:36:31]  Like maybe they're a real big guy. Maybe it's a little bit more pressure on those bands.  Maybe they aren't grinding on it or anything like that, but it's just the weight of their jaw fall -  ing back. Maybe they sleep on their back a lot and they're doing well with the appliance,  but it's just bottom line, stretching the bands out a lot. The options before doing what I'm  about to describe would be using a clear band or seeing if you could find a band that  would not stretch at all or using some way to make it so that the bands don't stretch. So  that's a different option. In this scenario, what we're going to do is we're going to, I'm going  to do these out of order on my slide here. We're going to block the EMA and then temp  bond. So I'm going to talk a little bit about blocking the EMA and some of the things that I  am teaching now in Spencer Study Club 2.0 are almost to give you a historical sense and  how we've done things over the years and how maybe you don't have to do stuff like this  anymore.  “Blocking” the EMA   [0:37:37]  So this is going to apply to a EMA specifically that has been made via thermoforming,  which is how they were made for a long time. Not going to apply to one that you 3D printed  because as you'll see in a minute, you would just redesign it and 3D print it again. You  would not go through these steps that I'm about to describe. So we call this blocking.  Blocking the EMA is in order to attempt to not have the band stretch out so fast. Now, other  ways to do that would be to use a, if you've been using a yellow and it's stretching out,  then move to a blue. If you've been using a blue and it stretches out, then move to a clear.  Historically with thermoformed appliances, we avoided the clear bands because the clear  bands are so hard, so stiff that the patient would be putting it on the appliance and break  the appliance. If you're using a nylon style EMA, that's not going to be a problem. You're  not going to break the appliance. If you're using a 3D printed EMA, then that could be a  problem still because it's not going to be quite as strong as that nylon.  [0:38:53]  All right. So anyway, even though you may never do what I'm about to describe, I'm still  going to talk you through this so you understand the thought process of why we would  even do this. So blocking an appliance, a EMA has a lower pad, right? So it has a lower  pad and you could adjust that to adjust the vertical and stuff. On the upper, it usually does  not have a pad. So a traditional EMA would be upper sucked down and then lower sucked  09/01/25   Page   of 12   15

SSC 2.0 - 211: ABC's of Fitting  down and then a pad added. So blocking it would be you would add another pad to the  upper. So this will be my upper jaw. And so I would have an upper pad and I'd have that  pretty darn far back. And then the pad that's already on the EMA would come up and inter -  act with that upper pad so that when the patient's laying back, it can't go backwards once  their teeth are together. And that's a critical little piece of the puzzle right there, right? Be -  cause if their teeth are apart, then they could still just slide back, right? But if their teeth are  together, then this being the mandible, this hitting this upper bump keeps it from falling  back.  [0:40:02]  Now that that bumps can interconnecting with each other, interacting with each other,  that's the principle of every interlocking appliance is that the upper, the maxillary has some  sort of thing and then the lower has some sort of thing that hits the upper thing and that  keeps the lower jaw from falling backwards. Now, when you put that on the occlusal sur -  face, that is very similar to a orthodontic appliance. It's been around for decades and  decades called the clear, called the twin block, excuse me. And the twin block had these  twin blocks and that would position the mandible forward when, when their teeth were to -  gether. And that's when this is going to work too. It's only going to work when their teeth  are together. If their teeth are apart a little bit, then their jaw could just fall back. So with  this blocking, we would add a little plastic on the maxillary, add some acrylic, have the pa -  tient chomp down into it, getting an indentation in the acrylic there, and then we would trim  it up and then that would be blocked and that would help those bands not stretch out as  fast as long as the patient spent a lot of time with their teeth together. If they didn't spend a  lot of time with their teeth together, it would make any difference at all.  [0:41:12]  So that was blocking. Again, nowadays, I don't know that I would ever do that. And if I  wanted to do that, I would do that probably with a 3D printed appliance and I would design  it into the appliance. I'm not a fan though of the appliance that's built that way, that again,  only will work if the person's teeth are together. So if you think about that, that style of an  appliance will only really do something if the patient is resting those pads interacting with  each other, against each other. Now, what about bonding? So the next step would be, all  right, the person's still stretching out these bands and they're doing well though. Again, as  long as they're in the right band, their snoring's gone and they're feeling awesome. Ideally,  we've had a follow-up sleep study at this point and we know it's working. I would typically  not do this next step unless I knew without a doubt that the appliance position is super ef -  fective for this person right now. Now, unfortunately, we got the whole floppy ears, we get  older thing, but nevertheless, right now would be the reason that we would do this.  [0:42:27]  It's working right now. So temp bonding, how does that work? So with a acrylic a suck  down thermoform type of an appliance, then we would add a little bit of acrylic at the pos -  terior aspects of that appliance. And so it's it together, we would grind a little bit of that  thermoform plastic, add a little bit of acrylic back there, stick the whole thing in their mouth  and then have it set in their mouth. It's not touching their teeth or their soft tissues there,  09/01/25   Page   of 13   15

SSC 2.0 - 211: ABC's of Fitting  it's just touching plastic to plastic, have it set up while it's in their mouth. And then that's  going to be one piece. Does that make sense? So that's going to be one piece after you've  done that. Now, why I call it a temp bond is we haven't added a whole boatload of acrylic  at this point. We've just kind of spot welded it at the posterior aspect there. Then we have  the patient use that appliance for a few nights and make sure they're okay. And that's all it  takes. It won't take weeks.  [0:43:26]  So if after two or three nights, they're like, that does not feel good at all to not be able to  move my jaw in any direction. I don't love that. Great. Then you just temporarily bonded it.  So you just break those bonds, trim off that plastic that you added and we're back to where  we were before. On the other hand, and in my experience, usually people can tolerate it  unless they're that lateral grinder. If they tolerate it well, then you can permanently bond it,  which would just be adding a bunch more plastic. Now again, in 2025, as I record this and  beyond, I don't know that I would do that. I would maybe do the temp bond step because  that would be pretty quick as long as you had a thermoform type of an appliance. And then  if they did well with that, then I would probably more likely consider just printing them an  appliance that's the monoblock rather than going through these steps with the acrylic. And  then just, again, it's just not going to be as nice. I would just probably make them a new  appliance that's the monoblock. You're not going to do that very much, but just kind of go  through some ideas here of something that you could do if you needed to.  Eliminating the “Screw Drift”   [0:44:34]  Okay, what about eliminating screw drift? So this is an issue if you use a tap style appli -  ance by some mechanism that I am not positive about, the screw on those appliances will  somehow move. And it's a mystery to me on how that will do that. But trust me, it will. So  the way to eliminate the screw drift and for most tap appliances, that means that if you  have an upper hook, that it's going to go back over time. On the DreamTap, the hook's on  the bottom. So that hook going back would actually bring the jaw forward. So that's super  unlikely to happen. So on a drain tap, you should never have to do what I'm about to de -  scribe. But if you're using a tap three, then you might have to do this. And what we do is,  so that you don't completely screw the thing up, just take some blue mousse, take some  bite registration material, squirt it in the screw area, wipe it off with your finger, and that's it.  So that's just going to put a stopper in there, and it's going to make it so that that screw  can't drift. Okay?  [0:45:51]  You could do that with other   appliances, but frankly, if you have some weirdo problem  that's happening with an appliance, post it to the Facebook group and ask, and probably  almost assuredly, someone in the group has had that problem before and has either come  up with a solution or come up with a workaround or something else. So these are just a  09/01/25   Page   of 14   15

SSC 2.0 - 211: ABC's of Fitting  couple ideas. I'm not going to spend several hours here on going through every mecha -  nism of action and every little thing that you can do. But probably it's been done before. So  if you have an issue with an appliance and you're thinking, hmm, this is having a problem,  post it to the Facebook group or look on the Facebook group. It may have already been  discussed even, and that solution will be there for you or someone will have probably dealt  with that in the past.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 15   15

