SSC 2.0 - 212: Finding the Sweet Spot  SSC 2.0   Level 2  212: Finding the Sweet Spot  [intro music]  Finding the Sweet Spot   [0:00:12]  So next let's talk about finding the sweet spot. And the sweet spot is the convergence or  overlapping of comfort, subjective improvement and objective improvement. We want all  three. Right? So it doesn't matter if the position of the oral appliance takes their AHI to  zero if the patient can't stand it. It doesn't matter, frankly, if their AHI is zero and they still  feel like crap. Now, we'll talk about that more in a bit 'cause that could matter. But as far as  the appliance is concerned, the patient really wants the outcome of feeling better. Not my  AHI is zero. That's not typically what most people are looking for. Okay. And then of  course, comfort. If it's not comfortable, then they're not gonna wear the thing in the first  place. So we are going for this sweet spot of that overlap of those three things. How we  get there, we start comfortably protruded. We don't start overly protruded. We start com -  fortably protruded. Show the patient how to adjust and encourage them to adjust forward  until they are snoring less, feeling better. Okay?  [0:01:22]  Those are the two things. Snoring less, feeling better. Now note that I don't say not snoring  at all. So the reason I don't say not snoring at all is because we've got that nasal snoring  thing, we've got positional snoring, we've got other stuff going on. And getting rid of the  snoring completely may not be possible without some surgical intervention, without lasing  the palate, without doing something else. Right? However, can we have snoring and not  have apneas and hypopneas? You bet. So to do this again, or to reiterate this point, and I  did this back in level one, but here is our open airway. So an open airway, no apneas, no  hypopneas, no snoring. As we close down that airway a little bit and make it floppy, and  then that first thing from open to a little bit more restricted and floppy would be snoring.  That's gonna be the noise of that tissue smacking against itself. That's gonna be snoring.  We go down a little bit more to where we get a 30 to 50% reduction of airflow. Now we  have a hypopnea. Okay, That's a hypopnea. We go all the way collapsed. That's an apnea.  Okay?  [0:02:38]  So as the apnea goes away, then the hypopnea would go away next, and then the snoring  would be last. Now this is the cool thing about focusing your titration on snoring, as long as  you're pretty confident that it's back of the throat snoring. Once again, to reiterate that  point, how do we know? So the back of the throat snoring is the classic, hey, honey, roll  over. You're snoring. Get the elbow, you roll onto your side and you're not snoring as much  09/01/25   Page   of 1   13

SSC 2.0 - 212: Finding the Sweet Spot  or not at all. That's what we're looking for. The person that's like, I snore in all positions. I  snore sitting up on an airplane. And that's probably their nose. And I would get them to an  ear, nose, and throat doctor to get that all worked out instead of confusing you that it's the  oral appliance is not being effective. So snoring is a big deal. If they've gone from snoring  and this is where the snore lab app comes in. If they have that objective measure, it gave  them a number or whatever, but we can hear it, right? They can touch on the snore lab  and hear the recording of them snoring, and they go from snoring to not snoring.  [0:03:45]  It is extremely unlikely that they're still having apneas. Okay? And I mean extremely unlike -  ly. So that you don't necessarily need the pulse oximeter and the home sleep test and all  that stuff. Just base it on the snoring. And if they don't have a bed partner, then it's snore  lab. If they have a bed partner, but the bed partner is not that good at giving that objective  data to you, then use snorelab. Use both. Okay?  That’s Our Goal   [0:04:11]  That's our goal. Snoring less, which we can measure from snore lab. Feeling better. Now,  the feeling better part, obviously, that is literally subjective. And that one, that's what we're  going for too. And we can play with that jaw position a little bit more. Let's say that the  snoring is significantly better, but they're still not feeling that well rested. Then maybe we  advance a little bit more and see if there's any difference. And there may not be. And we  may then start backing up the appliance. And they say, yeah, I still feel about the same. My  snoring started to come back. So then we're going to do that based on the snoring is going  to be the primary driver of this jaw position that needs to be effective. We're always gonna  adjust the appliance for any comfort issues. This can be a little bit confusing or surprising  maybe is a better word. But as you adjust the appliance in any direction, that changes the  force vectors on the appliance. So as you come a little forward, then they could go from  never having any pressure in their front teeth to now they have pressure in their front teeth  because of how that mechanism is now pulling on their front teeth.  [0:05:23]  It can go from tight to relatively loose just by adjusting it forward because it's pulling on it  different. Think about taking something out of someone's mouth. There will be that one  spot that if you just tug right there, you get that line of draw just right. Well, that can hap -  pen with a pull appliance or a push appliance or whatever that you change that a little bit.  And now when they open their mouth a little bit, less likely with a push appliance, but a pull  appliance, as they open their mouth a little bit now, it's easier to pull that off of the teeth,  because you've changed the angle of that pole. Okay? So that again, until you've done  100 of these or more, that will surprise you perhaps that first time that, hey your system  will be like, all I did was I went from an 18 band to a 17 man. And now it's like, can't even  09/01/25   Page   of 2   13

SSC 2.0 - 212: Finding the Sweet Spot  keep the thing on. Okay. It's super loose where it was fine with an 18. That's because of  the direction of that pull.  Objective Improvement   [0:06:20]  Okay. Once the snoring is less and they're feeling better, we refer back to the medical doc -  tor. How come? Because we want objective measurements. So this objective improve -  ment. Next slide here. So this objective improvement is the snoring, but it's also objective  AHI reduction, objective improvement in desaturation, stuff like that. So once we have the.  Yeah, my snoring is better from whatever objective measures I'm using there. I feel better.  Time to kick back to the medical doctor for, remember, for determination or for considera -  tion of a follow up sleep study. Some of the doctors will do that, some won't. Not your call. I  encourage all of my patients to get a follow up sleep study, but I always let them know that  that's gonna be between them and their physician whether they do that or not. We then  ideally have the appliance titrated or adjusted. Live in the sleep lab. I'll talk about that more  in a whole session there on adjusting the appliance live in the sleep lab. If you can't do  that. Then you do multiple nights of home sleep testing. Again, we're trying to find that  sweet spot of where is the position that we have the best objective improvement.  [0:07:40]  So once we're doing the sleep studies, either live in the sleep lab or the serial HST, we're  less concerned at that moment about the comfort and the subjective. It's all about that AHI  reduction again, the desaturations, improving, all that kind of stuff. Then we get our reports  back and review that and we find out that, this band was the best, or this many turns was  the best or whatever we can figure out from that titration protocol what was the best posi -  tion objectively. And then let's say the person's like, yeah, but that's seems a little bit too  far forward or that's a little uncomfortable. Then maybe we back up a bit and go there over  time and get to that spot. There'd be various ways we would do that because it's gonna be  important for comfort, subjective and objective, to all be included in our equation there.  What About Jaw Pain?   [0:08:36]  And speaking of a scenario where you might need to bring their jaw forward a little bit to  get that objective reduction, what about jaw pain? Well, remember, jaw pain is. We're not  even sure what that means until we've broken it down a bit with the patient. So if the pa -  tient says they have jaw pain, then we need to figure out, well, is it more muscle pain or is  it joint pain? And so we'll have them point with one finger, point to the masseter typically, or  the jaw joint. It's gonna be typically one of those two spots that's gonna hurt. Occasionally  it will be the temporalis.  09/01/25   Page   of 3   13

SSC 2.0 - 212: Finding the Sweet Spot  “Jaw Pain” Rules of Thumb   [0:09:09]  Now, our jaw pain rules of thumb is if the patient has muscle pain, consider reducing the  vertical. It's almost always gonna be reduction of vertical if they have muscle pain. Howev -  er, the exception to that rule, and the rather surprising exception to that rule is if you're us -  ing an anterior pull push appliance like a tap, and there's no posterior support, okay,  'cause that's how you had it made, then add posterior support. I know that seems weird  that you are giving them something to bite on, but that's exactly what you're doing. And in  my experience, that will work most of the time. So the idea behind that appliance not hav -  ing posterior support and is this kind of NTI effect, this anterior deprogrammer effect, that  when they bite on the front teeth, they don't have the same contraction of the masseter  and temporalis however, there are some people that I think they're trying.  [0:10:09]  Here's my theory. My theory is that they're just trying to swallow, and they don't have that  same sense of stabilization of the mandible when they swallow, when they just do it on  their front teeth. So they're struggling to do that. They're actually using their muscles more.  That causes some discomfort. And so you add that posterior support and then they can  swallow just fine, and then they're okay. So to reiterate, though muscle pain usually think  lowering vertical. The exception to that would be if they have an anterior pull push appli -  ance. Consider adding posterior stops. If the patient has TM joint pain, then check the pro -  trusion. Check to see if the midline is being shifted. So with any appliance that is adjusted  bilaterally. So not an anterior pull push appliance, a tap appliance, One of the advantages  of that style of appliance is it's coming from an anterior point. So when you pull the jaw  forward with that appliance, it will let the jaw come forward any way it wants to. So if the  right side wants to hang back a little bit and the left side wants to come a little farther for -  ward, it will. Whereas appliances that are adjusted bilaterally by whatever mechanism, so  wings or bands or pushing rods, that's going to.  [0:11:21]  You're typically going to adjust it bilaterally the same. And so that's going to make the jaw  come forward bilaterally the same. However, that can also be. There can be a mistake. So  if you use a push appliance is where I see this happen most of the time that has a turn -  buckle type of mechanism. It will literally be down on one side and up on the other side to  bring the jaw forward. That can be super duper confusing. And so the patient. It is not un -  common at all for them to do this wrong. And so they'll go down and they'll go down, and  then that way it goes forward and it goes backwards. Now, what might surprise you is in  my experience, the jaw joint that will have more pain is the joint that is less protruded.  Okay.  [0:12:08]  That's not 100% of the time, but it's probably 80% of the time. Okay? So look for that and  don't be surprised if you're like, whoa, weird. It's the side that's back, that's the one that's  09/01/25   Page   of 4   13

SSC 2.0 - 212: Finding the Sweet Spot  hurting more. Yeah, it's actually probably because it's allowing it still to be in an area where  it can cause some pressure in the joint. Whereas if you bring it forward a little bit more,  then mechanically you're making it so it can't hit any of those tissues anymore. The protru -  sion of the joint and being held there by the appliance. Remember, the patient doesn't  have to hold their jaw forward. Patient isn't contracting their lateral pterygoid to keep their  jaw forward all night long. They're relaxed. So the protrusion is almost never the reason  that that person is having joint pain.  Non-Intuitive Exception to the Rules of Thumb   [0:12:53]  The non-intuitive exceptions to the rule of thumb, or the non-intuitive exception, I guess, to  the rules of thumb, is this idea of fighting the appliance. Remember, we're putting them in  initial position, comfortably protruded, where we're just kind of starting in this relatively ar -  bitrary position. You can do things like snoring noise in the back of your throat, breathing  the jaw forward. You could use a pharyngometer if you wanted to. Don't really care about  that stuff though, because none of it matters until the person's asleep in the posture that  they sleep in in their bed. Okay? That's the only thing that matters.  [0:13:31]  Having a cone beam CT with the jaw forward. Don't do that too much radiation. Doing the  snore noise, you can totally do that. I suggest you do that. But even if the patient kind of  made noise with their jaw forward, that wouldn't freak me out too much. I would still treat  them. You could use the pharyngometer if you've got one, but I wouldn't waste the time as  far as I'm concerned. But the idea overall is that we're starting relatively arbitrary. We are  going forward from there if necessary. Lots of times we don't need to go forward at all. But  there's gonna be some people that us putting an appliance in their mouth is not just going  to automatically protect their airway. So they might fight the appliance, fight on it, grind on  it, posture their jaw. It might activate more of their muscles than they're used to. And this  could cause jaw pain. And if they have jaw pain, then again they might stop wearing the  appliance. Whatever, they take it out, their jaw pain gets better. So now you're oh, now for  sure it's the appliance.  Ask the Patient   [0:14:31]  And the intuitive thing to do would be to back it up, right? So it'd be to. You're thinking,  well, they didn't have a problem until I put this thing in their mouth that brings their jaw for -  ward. So let me back it up. Okay? Before we're backing it up, we're asking a couple ques -  tions. Those questions are, are you still snoring? How are you sleeping? If they say, well  I'm still snoring and I'm not sleeping well, then we're gonna go full steam ahead. Right? If  the snoring's better and they're sleeping better, then look for those protrusion things, look  09/01/25   Page   of 5   13

SSC 2.0 - 212: Finding the Sweet Spot  for the other stuff, look for the vertical, look for all that other stuff. But these are gonna be  the first questions we ask. If you look on Spencer Study Club's Facebook page, there's  gonna be hundreds and hundreds of posts of people having jaw pain or whatever. And  usually someone will ask and if it's not anyone else, it'll be me. Do you know the appliance  is working is the thing I'm gonna ask. Okay, like the person's having jaw pain, what should  I do? Well, do you know it's working and well, no. Or what do you mean by that? It's like,  well, has there been an objective follow up? Have they had a sleep study? Do we know it's  actually doing what it's designed to do, which is protect the airway? If we don't know it's  protecting the airway, then protecting the airway is the primary thing here.  [0:15:50]  If you believe any of the stuff that bruxism might be related to an airway issue, then we  need to first address the airway issue before we can worry about the bruxism. Okay. If the  airway is not protected, then they could clench, grind their teeth, all this kind of stuff.  Right? Okay. Hopefully that makes total sense. So we're gonna go farther forward if we  think that the airway is not protected. Since you might be a little concerned about doing  this the first couple times. Now I've taught this to thousands of dentists at this point and  knock on wood, I have yet to ever have a dentist reach out to me and be like, hey Jami -  son, you taught me that non-intuitive exception to the rules of thumb stuff and I brought  someone's jaw forward and it made them worse. I've never had that happen yet. Okay,  maybe someday I will, but so far I haven't. And I've taught this to a boat load of people. As  a matter of fact, in the American Academy of Dental Sleep Medicine guidelines on dealing  with side effects, I was part of that panel, part of that group that put those together. And if  you read through those, you will read where it says that. It says actually like in very rare  circumstances. The reason the person might have jaw pain is because their jaw is not pro -  truded far enough. Why the language is that way is because the other people on the panel  had no clue about TMJ problems.  [0:17:10]  And so that shocked them like they'd never heard anything like that before. And it was kind  of fun afterwards because multiple of the people on that panel reached out to me oh, wow,  thanks, Jamison, for teaching me that. I'd never heard that before. I'd always thought if  they have any jaw pain at all, I gotta take their jaw backwards. After hearing from you and  learning to ask them about their snoring and how they're sleeping, if they're still doing  those things, I bring their jaw forward. That's worked every time. Okay? So don't be too  freaked out about this. This makes all the sense in the world. If you think it through, your  patient will not be scared about this at all. When you say, hey, we're maybe just not quite  there yet, and your body is still trying to protect your airway. We got this big thing of plastic  in there that's not protecting the airway. So you're actually fighting the appliance.  Snoring Can be Nasal   [0:17:56]  09/01/25   Page   of 6   13

SSC 2.0 - 212: Finding the Sweet Spot  Now, remember, snoring can be nasal. So let's don't make the mistake here of we're just  jacking them forward. Jamison said, if they're snoring, keep on going forward. No, Jamison  didn't say that. Jamison said, if they're snoring, keep going forward. If you think that it's  back of the throat snoring, and again, that's going to be I snore on my back, on my side,  it's way less. If I was sitting up, it's not at all. Versus the person who says, I snore in all po -  sitions, laying on my stomach, I snore sitting up on a plane. If I nod off, I'll snore sitting up  on a plane. That's nasal snoring. Get that person to an ENT. But we've covered this be -  fore. But repetition is the mother of skill here. How do we do that? How would we know?  How would we quickly, in one night, figure that out? Afrin and breathe Right strips or Afrin  and nasal aid. Okay, so Afrin to shrink the tissues and then the nasal aid or the breathe  Right strips to open up externally the nose so that they can breathe through their nose bet -  ter. If that makes their snowing significantly better, which you could use the Snore lab app  or their bed partners report, then you know it's nasal, get them to the ENT, that's gonna  take care of it and it's gonna change their life.  When in Doubt.. Keep Moving Forward   [0:19:12]  When in doubt, keep moving forward. And if you're relatively new to this, that is surprising  to you because we just have always thought, well, no, I can't take the jaw forward. That's  gonna be a problem. The airway is the most important thing. What does your brain care  more about, air or jaw pain? Okay, probably air. Right? Now, I'm not saying that the way  you think I am though. The reason that the jaw pain occurs is because the airway is not  protected. So that person is holding their jaw forward, they're doing things to try to protect  their jaw, even with an appliance in their mouth. And that is the probable cause of their jaw  pain. As soon as you can put that appliance in the right spot and now they can completely  relax their jaw. Even it's out here is still relaxed. Okay? To do this, you have to contract  your lateral pterygoids to bring it forward like that. But if you put an appliance in and then  you just said relax, all those tissues could be relaxed, held forward. Once the airway is  protected, those muscles are able to relax.  Tips and Tricks   [0:20:28]  So let me give you a few tips and tricks with regard to oral appliance therapy and various  things that may come up. So, first, what about a patient who has pending restorative den -  tistry, more than just a couple fillings or something like that? Just a couple like occlusal fill -  ings or pit fillings. It's not gonna be a problem. You can adapt the appliance to that. But if  they're gonna have multiple crowns or bridge or dental implants or whatever, then you're  gonna be in this position of well, do we treat their life threatening sleep apnea or do we  wait while we do the restorative? And there's gonna be a lot of it depends in this discus -  09/01/25   Page   of 7   13

SSC 2.0 - 212: Finding the Sweet Spot  sion, okay? So some of it's gonna depend on the level of their sleep apnea. And actually,  let me say that a different way. It's gonna depend on the level that their sleep apnea af -  fects them. Okay? So just because someone has mild sleep apnea doesn't mean that it's  not impacting their life significantly. So a person who has an upward sleepiness scale  score of 18 or 19 or 20, they are really at risk, okay? 'Cause remember, the upward  sleepiness scale is actually measuring doziness and that person's falling asleep all the  time. So that person, I would get them in an appliance A to the SAP and if they tried CPAP  already, even more important 'cause they got nothing that they can do here and they're  gonna fall asleep at the wheel and kill somebody or themselves.  Consider “Temporary” or “Soft/Hard” Appliance   [0:22:06]  So depending on their level of what's going on with them that would be the biggest factor  here of how fast the other hand, if they, it's more almost cosmetic. They snore, they don't  feel, that their sleep is poor, they're relatively fit, they're doing well in general. We're just  hoping that they do better. Then you might be like, hey, let's get these restorations done.  And then that way we're not gonna have an issue with your appliance. That'd be fine. And  especially if you could do that pretty quick now, if it's gonna be a while before you can get  the restorations done for whatever reason, obviously the most common, at least in the  United States is gonna be, they're waiting for the renewal of their dental insurance benefit.  So you're going to do a little bit this year and a little bit more next year. And that can kind of  make things take longer. So let's say that is the case. It's gonna take a while. So you could  consider using a temporary appliance or you could do a soft, hard appliance, one with a  soft layer and then think, okay, once we get the dentistry done, then I'm gonna remove that  soft liner and flow in acrylic or thermacryl or something like that over the restorations or,  and I would say this would be the best suggest or scenario consider making an in house  appliance, ideally 3D printed.  Consider 3D Printed   [0:23:34]  So if you can 3D print now and again as of the recording of this, and this will probably  change over time, but as of the recording of this, there's only one 3D printed appliance that  you can make in house. And the way they are currently doing the pricing of that is there's  a, royalty that you pay, but you only pay that royalty once and then you've got the design  of the appliance. So you would be able to design the appliance, make it, and then if they  had a new crown or they had some other stuff done, then theoretically you could make a  new appliance, let the company know or whatever. Hey, this is for the exact same person  that I made it for before and I don't think that they would charge you an additional royalty.  So it wouldn't really cost you that much more to build the next appliance. And when this is  09/01/25   Page   of 8   13

SSC 2.0 - 212: Finding the Sweet Spot  your patient, it's a little easier, frankly, because they're paying for the restorative dentistry  too, and stuff like that. And you don't really need to nickel and dime them on the covering  of that initial, sequential lab bill. I would just kind of put that into the whole package, take  that into account. If it's not your patient and you're working with their dentist, same thing. I  wouldn't nickel and dime the patient. Their dentist is gonna be happy with you that you are  accommodating the patient, that you're accommodating them and the patient allowing  them to do whatever they need to do with their dental insurance, stuff like that. So just  make it work. You use your brain, figure out how to make this work to treat their life threat -  ening problem now and adapt for whatever dentistry needs to be done.  Patient Who Can’t Tolerate the Original Appliance   [0:25:13]  Now what if the patient can't tolerate the original appliance? After lots of attempts, you've  done everything you can think of. You've gotten them back multiple times and this just not  working for some reason. Okay, so couple points here. If it's determined that different ap -  pliance style might be better tolerated, consider fabrication of a new appliance. As a be -  ginner, you're just gonna make some mistakes. You're gonna have an appliance that you  like and so you lean people towards that appliance. Then you find out that like, oh shoot,  now that I know a little bit better, I gave that person an interlocking appliance and they  clearly have evidence of lateral bruxism and even though I know it's working to protect  their airway, they're still grinding their teeth. So that's the problem. They need to be in an  appliance that allows lateral motion.  [0:26:04]  Some of those cases, if I'm you, I take that as part of my dumb tax, I pay my dumb tax and  I move on. I take that as part of my education. You could put that in your CE budget if you  don't like the way dumb tax. But you learn from your mistakes and you don't penalize the  patient for your practicing on them and you move on and then you're less likely to make  that mistake in the future. Now another kind of trick that we've come across over the years  is, and I don't know that this works with every temporary appliance. I bet it doesn't, but it  does with this one for some reason. So this, I sometimes jokingly refer to this as the sushi  appliance. So this is the silent sleep that I invented. By the time you're watching this video,  hopefully there will be a 3D printed version of the Silent sleep that's gonna be way sleeker  and super inexpensive to make for people.  [0:27:07]  This one is a tray. You can barely see it, but you see these kind of this clear plastic there.  So it's a injection molded tray that's flexible. And then all the pink stuff is GC reline materi -  al. So you line this tray and then the patient bites down in it and they push out with their  tongue while it's setting. And this will be very smooth on their cheeks, very smooth on their  tongue. As you see, there's nothing in the anterior at all. So there's a little bar that goes  behind the mandibular incisors that you can't see on this picture. But it's really feels small.  09/01/25   Page   of 9   13

SSC 2.0 - 212: Finding the Sweet Spot  Even though it looks kind of bulky in your mouth, it feels very small. The person can move  side to side a little bit. They can open, okay. If they want to, they can lick their lips, they  can put their lip or their tongue between their teeth like that. It's super duper comfortable.  And we've had a lot of people over the years that we just try and try to get them to tolerate  whatever appliance it is that we chose for them and they can’t, and sometimes it's one of  those where it's like, well, what don't you like about it? And it'll be like, I don't know, is it too  tight? No. Is it too loose? No. Is it rough? No. Is it hurting your jaw in some way? No. What  is it? I don't know, but I don't like it.  [0:28:35]  And when you trust me, you'll have a patient that says exactly that. And you get to that  point, you're like, well, what the heck can I do? This has worked. And typically the way we  present it to the patient is, well, hey, based on what you're telling me here, I don't think  there's any appliance that I can think of that is going to work for you. So before we go to  great expense of making another custom made everything appliance for you, why don't we  try something? This is okay, this dialogue is important. This has worked. For other patients  in the past. Okay, so some social proof there. Trying to get some placebo effect on our  side here. Right? This has worked for some other patients in the past. Maybe because it  kind of molds to your mouth, uniquely to your mouth, and it gives your tongue lots of  space.  [0:29:27]  But why don't we try this? Okay, now this is how we would do it. We won't charge you for  it, and if it works, awesome. And if it doesn't, at least we can say we tried a couple different  things. Okay, so the patient is in a no lose situation there. We fit this. Now, typically we're  gonna know that the position of the appliance was working. Snoring less, feeling better at  least. Ideally, we've even got objective follow up. Not always, 'cause sometimes this issue  will come up before you've been able to get them to the point of objective follow up. But  ideally we would know objectively that we're protecting the airway. 'Cause remember, if  we're not protecting the airway, then that could be the reason that they're having discom -  fort or stuff like that. But this isn't so much of a even discomfort issue or whatever. It's just  the person not liking it for whatever reasons that they can't even communicate to you.  That's more what I'm talking about here. So we fit the silent sleep. We've got that jaw posi -  tion. They should know. You should know that edge to edge or 1 millimeter past or what -  ever seems to be a jaw position that's effective.  [0:30:34]  We fit this. Let them try it. I can't tell you how many times that this has worked okay. And  rather surprisingly, but it does. Now the nice thing about the silent sleep, and this is a good  and bad, so the good of the good and bad is no one can adjust this other than you. So you  could have this person kind of disappear. And they, it's impossible for them to change their  jaw position. That's also kind of the bad because if you fit it and they're like, oh my gosh,  actually I really like this. The snoring is not quite as good with this though, as it was with  the other appliance that I didn't like. That one seemed to work better with my snoring than  this one. But I love how this feels. I can totally do this. I can totally tolerate this appliance.  09/01/25   Page   of 10   13

SSC 2.0 - 212: Finding the Sweet Spot  We might just need to change the position a little bit. Okay, then. The way this appliance is  adjusted is you take out, you rip out the GC reline material and you reline it with more GC  reline material as we do the printed version, you just print another one in a slightly different  position. Okay? You'd have to take a by record. So that is a little trick of the trade there. If  somebody is just not working, but they're not giving you really good reasons why. Okay?  If Oral Appliance Therapy Fails   [0:31:55]  All right. What about if oral appliance therapy fails to adequately reduce the AHI, or the pa -  tient can't tolerate any type of appliance. You even tried the silent sleep thing and it's just  like, no go, can't do this at all.  [0:32:08]  All right. For AHI reduction, if that's kind of the big thing. And this could also sometimes be  directed by the physician. Right? So sometimes you'll have the patient and they may actu -  ally be doing great as far as they're concerned. Storing less, feeling better. But the AHI is  reduced. Not as much as their pulmonologist sleep doctor typically wants it to be. Now, as  I put over here on the side of this slide, make sure you read the sleep study report your -  self. Don't just go on. Yeah, it's what the patient said or whatever. You're gonna get the re -  port and you need the full data report, be that an HST or a PSG, 'cause you're gonna need  to look at all the different parameters. We're gonna go over this when we talk about re -  viewing sleep studies, but you're gonna need to go through all of those 'cause real quick,  I've mentioned this in this series already.  [0:33:03]  One AHI reduction thing that is commonly missed is if you go from long apneas to shorter  apneas, but they're still defined apneas, then the AHI won't be impacted that much. So for  example, if I had, this is an extreme example, but If I had one 60 second apnea versus  four 15 second apneas. So both of those add up to 60 seconds of the person was stopping  breathing, but one would count as one apnea, the 62nd one. The other one would count as  four apneas because they were the 415 second ones. Right? So you gotta look for stuff  like that 'cause sometimes that's what happens is they go from these really long apneas to  shorter apneas, but it's still an apnea and that you would count more of the shorter ap -  neas. That's one example. Another quick example is postural. This is the biggest one for  sure is the patient was on their side in the baseline study. And now with the oral appliances  help, they're able to sleep on their back and not die. So their AHI on their back with the  oral appliance in REM sleep is similar to what it was on their side before. Okay?  [0:34:26]  So the solution in that case is get the patient back on their side, and then they'll be com -  pletely fine. But in my experience, it's usually us, the dentist that has to point that out to be  like, hey, doc, did you notice that on the new study, that didn't seem like their AHI was that  great. They were on their back all night long and got three times more REM sleep than  09/01/25   Page   of 11   13

SSC 2.0 - 212: Finding the Sweet Spot  they did on the baseline study. Normally, in my experience, they will not be like, oh, yeah, I  did notice that. Okay? They'll be like, oh, really? Oh, well, that makes sense of why the  AHI wasn't dropped that much. Yeah, that's what I was thinking. Okay, so read it yourself.  Go into this stuff. Back to what we do, though. If the AHI hasn't been reduced, we look at  all the stuff and we're like, yeah darn it. It's just not being reduced as much as we'd like.  [0:35:14]  Consider matching it up with CPAP. The best way to do that combination therapy is what -  ever oral appliance they've already got and whatever nasal mask that they tolerate the  best. That could be the nasal pillows or a nasal mask or a full face mask. Whatever don't  attach it to the appliance. I don't think you wanna do that. That causes all sorts of other is -  sues to deal with. So just whatever mask, whatever oral appliance, and remind the patient  that I know you struggled with CPAP in the first place. Assuming that they tried CPAP in  the first place, this is gonna dramatically reduce the pressure that's needed. And they will  usually be willing to try that. If an oral appliance can't be tolerated, then strongly encour -  age the patient to get back with their DME provider to see if anything can be tried with  CPAP and or refer for surgical consultation.  [0:36:05]  Okay, so here. Now it's just like, nope, or appliance won't work. Can't do it. Then we try to  get them back another try at the CPAP. And there's a lot of cool things coming on with  CPAP. So as I'm recording this in 2025, someone who's become a friend of myself and  Spencer study club is Dr. William Noah or Bill Noah. And Bill is a sleep doctor in the Nash -  ville area, and he has been on a mission for years and years to make CPAP more tolera -  ble. And so he created something that he calls KPAP or KairosPAP. And he has also a de -  vice that can be added to any CPAP that reduces the pressure. So I actually have  breathed on KPAP and it's a dramatic difference. Dramatic. So he actually brought this to  Spencer Study Club. You could go back and look at this. That was in 2024. Yes, 2024.  That bill Noah was one of our guests, spoke for the full day. And we've even got this on  camera on video at the end where he had me on the CPAP versus the KPAP. That's on  video.  [0:37:24]  You could actually go back and get those videos. I don't know if you knew that or not, but  for past Spencer Study Club live events, we have them recorded and you can go back and  get those recordings from those events just like you were there. There is tuition involved  just like you were there. But you could go back and get those recordings and watch those  pretty amazing people that we've had over the years at the Speaker Study Club live  events. Bottom line though is by the time you're watching this, this will be on the market.  And this is going to dramatically improve compliance on CPAP, we hope. And just being  aware of that is really important 'cause you'll have patients that they tried CPAP 10 years  ago. Okay. Stuff has changed. Machines have gotten better, masks have gotten better.  Now with KPAP, that's gonna make a absolutely day and night difference with this. And  what does that also mean? It also means combination therapy is even gonna be more ef -  fective. So with oral appliance and KPAP that already reduces the pressures in half. So  09/01/25   Page   of 12   13

SSC 2.0 - 212: Finding the Sweet Spot  then reduce it half again with combination therapy of the normal appliance, it's gonna be  pretty awesome. Okay, so those are a couple tricks, tips and tricks for when the AHI is not  reduced as much as you'd like.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 13   13

