SSC 2.0 - 218: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Study #1  SSC 2.0   Level 2  218: Understanding Sleep Studies;  Case Study #1  [intro music]  Case Studies of Sleep Studies   [0:00:12]  Okay, all right. So let's get into some case studies of sleep studies, and I will help you look  for these clues on these that you will then see in your studies. Now, those of you who've  been members of Spencer Study Club for a long time, these first few case studies I did be -  fore. So these dates are a million years ago, and I kept these in here for Spencer Study  Club 2.0 because they are really good cases to teach you stuff, and then I put in some  newer things too. But we'll start off with these that you may have seen in the past, but it's  probably been several years since you've seen these so it doesn't hurt to go over it again.  Case Study 1 - Page 1   [0:00:56]  All right, so here we have initial sleep study 2007. Some background on this study is the  patient was a radio personality, and very well known, and it was a big deal for us to treat  him. How it came to be that he even got a sleep study was I did some radio commercials  for sleep apnea, and we got to talking one day and this guy was pretty overweight and  whatnot, and I was like, "You should really look into this!" and I got him in, and he got a  study, and this is that study, okay?  [0:01:40]  So to go through this, I won't read like every line of every sleep study that we go through in  the future here. We'll be here for 100 hours, but this one, let me go through this to kind of  explain things. So on this sleep architecture, testing began at 11.38 p.m., ended at 5.31  a.m. Total time in bed, TIB, of five hours, 52 minutes, 56 seconds. Sleep period time was 5  hours, 52 minutes, 53 seconds, so the SPT and TIB are the same. In other words, he had  the opportunity to sleep during that full time. Total sleep time was 5 hours, 21 minutes, and  58 seconds. So there's our differential between time in bed or sleep period time and total  sleep time of 5:21:58. This gave us a sleep efficiency, which is your total sleep time divided  by time in bed, of 91.2%. So pretty high sleep efficiency for a... This is a full PSG, so it  says at the top, polysomnogram. So pretty high sleep efficiency.  [0:02:51]  09/01/25   Page   of 1   8

SSC 2.0 - 218: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Study #1  Then we have some incorrect stuff, so it says the sleep latency was 0 minutes, 0 seconds.  That would be that he fell asleep instantly, which is probably not the case. It's possible, but  that would be weird. So it would be very strange for someone to go to sleep instanta -  neously, but it is possible. But I'm going to say that's a... I don't think that's right. REM la -  tency was 1 hour, 59 minutes, 58 seconds. So note the precision on these things, right?  So this isn't like, yeah, REM started at about two hours. It's REM started at one hour, 59  minutes, and 58 seconds of sleep. And that's what you can do with a polysomnogram that  you are less able to do with certain home sleep testing. You can't do it at all with a lot of  home sleep tests. Okay? There were two periods of REM observed on this study night as  well as 18 awakenings and 103 stage shifts. Sleep stage and body position. Sleep stage  distribution expresses percentage of total sleep time was as follows. Stage 1 was 14.7%,  so that's a little high. Stage 2, 28.7%. That's lower than normal.  [0:04:04]  Stage 3, 4, so back in 2007, they were transitioning from 3 and 4 to just 3, was 39.4%.  Okay, that's high, right? REM sleep, 17%. That's a little low. That's how I kind of want you  going through these things too is when you see this, you're just like, oh, a little high, a little  low, normal, whatever. Sleep expresses percentage of total sleep time was observed in the  supine of 5.5% on the back. Right lateral, 0%. Left lateral, 94.4%. And on the stomach  prone was 0%. Okay, so keep that in mind, that's going to be important here in a second.  Respiratory parameters. There were 25 apneas, 25 obstructive apneas, 0 central, 0 mixed  apneas. So all of the apneas were obstructive. 104 hypopneas, okay? Now, something I  like to do in going over this with patients is I will take their sleep study physically, or you  could do this on an iPad, or you could just have this done in advance if you wanted, like a  whiteboard would be cool. You could have a laminated sheet to do this. But I'll say, "Hey,  remember in your sleep study you had a thing in your nose. And that thing in your nose  was measuring airflow."  [0:05:32]  And on the computer screen it would have looked like this, in, out, in, out, in, out, and then  it would have gone flat, okay? I'm going to start that over. In, out, in, out, in, out, and then it  would go flat. That would be called an apnea, okay? You did that 25 times. Or it's going in,  out, in, out, in, out, and then it's this shallow breathing stuff. That's called a hypopnea. So  in, out, in, out, in, out, and then it goes more shallow breathing, 30 to 50% reduction of  your airflow. That's called a hypopnea. You did that 104 times, okay? So in this case, does  he have more hypopneas? Does he have more? So again, we call it sleep apnea. Does he  have more sleep hypopnea or sleep apnea? Well, he has four times as much sleep hy -  popnea as sleep apnea. And this is common. As a matter of fact, sometimes it's even more  of a differential there, where they will have far more hypopneas than they do apneas. This  is really important for you to explain to your patient. So the patient was probably told that  they stopped breathing a certain amount of times per hour or, well, usually per hour.  [0:06:58]  So the apnea hypopnea index is oftentimes misinterpreted, particularly by primary care  doctors, as you stopped breathing 30 times an hour. And that patient goes home and tells  09/01/25   Page   of 2   8

SSC 2.0 - 218: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Study #1  their bed partner, yeah, they said I stopped breathing 30 times an hour. And the bed part -  ner says, "No, you don't." You don't stop breathing anywhere close to that. You might stop  breathing two or three times an hour. And if you look at the data, that's how many apneas  they had. They had two to three apneas per hour, and then they had maybe 28 hypopneas  per hour. Make sure you look into this. Make sure you explain it. As a matter of fact, this is  the most important thing that you will explain on a sleep study. Right here is this differential  between the AHI and how many times I stopped breathing. This will get them on your side.  They will understand it. They will be like, "Oh, that makes so much sense. I get it now be -  cause I didn't believe this, that I stopped breathing 30 times an hour." Like, there are so  many people out there that think the whole sleep study thing is a total joke because they're  like, I don't stop breathing.  [0:08:03]  They said I stopped breathing 30 times an hour, once every two minutes. I don't. That's not  true. Well, it's true that it's not true. They don't stop breathing. They have a lot of hypop -  neas. Okay. Now this sleep study is a little bit weird because it kind of gives us AHI, RDI  stuff here, but never like the total. So on the respiratory parameters, just covered that.  Then it says the RDI was 26.5 during non-REM, 12 in REM, which is weird, right? So that's  a check in the weird column that it's better in REM sleep. The RDI was 88 in the supine  position. Didn't sleep in the right lateral. 20 in the left lateral position. And again, not ap -  plicable in the prone position. So a lot of data here. Oddly, they don't give kind of the total  AHI. So we're kind of left to figure that out ourself here. But we have the non-REM and  REM sleep of 26.5 and 12. But here's kind of the take-home message is the RDI was 88 in  the spine position. So this guy is really bad on his back. How much time did he spend on  his back? Only 5%.  [0:09:15]  So only 5% of the night was spent on his back. And it looks like every time he got onto his  back, he had apneas- hypopneas. Okay. Every time he got on his back and then he would  quickly move off of his back. Oximetry. Mean SpO2 during sleep time was 93.8%. This was  in Boise, Idaho. So that's at about 2,500 elevation. Minimum SpO2 time during total sleep  time was 88%. Oxygen saturation was between 90 to 100% for 97.2% of the night. Arousal  and limb movement summary. The arousal consists of spontaneous EEG, respiratory and  limb movement arousal events. Of the total arousals, 43 were of spontaneous nature. So it  had nothing to do with limb movements and stuff like that. A total of 80 arousals were as -  sociated with respiratory events. So apneas-hypopneas. 14.9 events per hour. Zero were  associated with limb movements. There was a total of one of a total limb movement index.  So no, only had the jimmy leg one time. And that was not associated with a arousal. So  then the interpretation, the study demonstrated severe supine dependent obstructive ap -  nea. Snoring was present intermittently. No limb movements or clinical significant were  seen.  [0:10:36]  The EKG showed sinus rhythm. Sleep architecture was normal. Recommendation trial of  CPAPs indicated. All right. So there is our baseline study. Didn't give you the overall AHI at  09/01/25   Page   of 3   8

SSC 2.0 - 218: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Study #1  any point there. Nevertheless, the interpretation is we got severe supine dependent ob -  structive sleep apnea. This is bad news on his back.  Page 2   [0:11:02]  All right. Now, fast forward five years and we are doing our EMA titration. And the way  these are done is in the way we've done this forever is the patient is brought back into the  sleep lab. They have their appliance in the position that it is currently being worn and ap -  pears to be working. And then the technician will change the bands forward throughout the  night if indicated. So if there are still apneas and hypopneas, then the technician goes in,  says, "Hey, Jim, we're going to adjust your appliance." The patient spits out the appliance.  Room stays dark. Technician goes back out in the hall, makes the change, comes back in.  "Hey, let's get that back in your mouth now." Puts it back in the mouth. Okay. That's how  we do it. All right. So I won't read all of this standard protocol stuff, but that's all of the dif -  ferent things that they put on and all that stuff.  [0:11:58]  History of present illness, 47-year-old male, post-polysomnogram of December. It says  2008, but it's 2007, which showed moderate obstetric sleep apnea with an HIV of 24  events per hour. Interesting, huh? So I just showed you the interpretation said severe  supine-dependent sleep apnea, but they went back and said, yeah, it was moderate, 24  events per hour. It doesn't say diddly about the supine stuff on this report, and that's impor -  tant. Okay. It's got the past medical history, stuff like that. Oh, by the way, it says he was  intolerant to CPAP therapy, hence fit with the mandibular advancement device. What hap -  pened, the reason there was that five-year gap there, is he gets the sleep study. He tries  CPAP. I wasn't doing the radio ads and stuff like that. So it was years later that I came  back in touch with him and was like, "Hey, man, how's it going?" He's like, "Yeah, it's not  going at all. I'm not doing anything." Hey, let's get you in. Let's do an oral appliance for  you. Let's see how it goes. And he loved it. He did great with the oral appliance. Thought it  was pretty awesome.  Page 3   [0:13:06]  Okay, BMI 32.2. That's a big dude. Neck circumference 20 1/2 inches. That's big. If you're  a woman and you don't know neck circumference because you don't buy shirts like that.  So, for example, I wear a 15 1/2 inch neck. That's my neck size in a dress shirt. So 20 1/2  is big neck. So this dude's a big dude. Okay, some information here. Moderate sternum  was reduced but not eliminated using the EMA. The patient was titrated from 19 millimeter  yellow to 19 blue to 17 yellow to 17 blue to 15 yellow. That's how we used to do it. So back  then, the bands only came in 2 millimeter increments. So it's 19, 17, 15, 13. 21 was the  longest one. And so we would go yellow, blue, yellow, blue, yellow, blue like that in order to  09/01/25   Page   of 4   8

SSC 2.0 - 218: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Study #1  go in 1 millimeter increments. Nowadays, the bands are in one millimeter increments with  all of the colors. So we don't tend to do that anymore. So now when titration is done, it's  more like, you know, they start with the 19 blue and then the 18 blue and the 17 blue and  16 blue. We wouldn't do this color thing anymore, but we did back then.  Morning Questionnaire   [0:14:17]  All right, morning questionnaire. So this is cool. They asked the patient questions like how  long did you think it took you to fall asleep and stuff like that. And so that's kind of his ac -  count of the sleep study. Sleep architecture, total sleep time, 356 minutes. Sleep efficien -  cy, 82%. Why do you think that sleep efficiency is so much less on this EMA titration  study? Why would you have less sleep efficiency? Did you say because he got woke up all  a bunch of times during the night to change the EMA? That's right. So that's why the sleep  efficiency would be less is because they had to go in and change because they went from  19 yellow to blue. So he started with yellow. So you got woke up once for the 19 blue,  twice for the 17 yellow, three times for the 17 blue, fourth time for the 15 yellow. Okay. Now  the texts are great, and they keep the room dark and stuff like that. Nevertheless, that's  going to definitely decrease your sleep efficiency. That makes sense.  [0:15:28]  All right. Took him a little longer to go to sleep. Sleep hypnogram reveals fragmented  sleep, three distinct REM periods. Remember in the first study had two REM periods,  sleep stages, and one, 5%. That's about right. And two 56%. That's about right. And three  6% little low and stage REM 33% little high. Okay. Based on that, with more REM sleep  than the previous study, would that make it more likely to have obstructions and obstruc -  tive apneas and obstructive hypopneas, or less likely? If you have more REM sleep, are  you more likely or less likely to have apneas and hypopneas? Answer, more likely. Okay.  Then here is the most important body position. 100% of the night spent in the supine posi -  tion. Okay. Do you remember what it was on the baseline study? 5%. In this study, 100%.  Hmm. Do you remember what his AHI was? There's RDI, as they put it on the baseline  study, when he was on his back? 88. Okay. The comment was severe supine dependent  sleep apnea. Okay. This one is on his back the whole night. Weird, right? Why is that? All  right. We'll see what happens with that.  Page 4   [0:16:57]  Okay. Limb movements. He did have some limb movements. That's interesting. Arousal  index with limb movements, 26.3 events per hour. The majority is nonspecific in origin, so  he did have the jimmy leg there a little bit. Respiratory, the part that we're kind of looking  for here with the oral appliance therapy. The patient had persistent obstructive sleep ap -  09/01/25   Page   of 5   8

SSC 2.0 - 218: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Study #1  nea despite the mandibular advancement device. Using a 17 millimeter blue band, the pa -  tient slept 63 minutes, including time in the supine position, as well as in stage REM sleep.  Okay, so remember, they're always looking for supine REM because that's when the per -  son's going to be worse. During that 63 minutes, he had 4 obstructive apneas, 17 hypop -  neas. Once again, is this guy's problem more apnea or hypopnea? He's having more hy -  popneas than he has apneas. So the apnea-hypopnea index during that 63 minutes is 20  events per hour. Now, at the beginning of the study, it said that his baseline had an AHI of  24. All right, so we've taken him from 24 AHI to 20. That's not making for a very good radio  commercial, is it? You know, we took his sleep apnea from 24 to 20. Woo-hoo, right? I  mean, that's not very good, is it? Okay, so the details here are important, though. Keeping  going here, oxygen saturation, the mean was 93, the Nadir was 89, 2.6% of time below 88,  so not terrible there. Conclusion, the patient obstructive sleep apnea persisted despite the  mandibular advancement device. And let's see what they said for him to do.  Page 5   [0:18:43]  Consider restarting CPAP therapy and attempt to treat the patient's underlying obstructive  sleep apnea and hypoxemia. Alternatively, we could use the mandibular advancement de -  vice and throw him on some oxygen. Consider treatment of the PLMs. Patient should fol -  low up. Please feel free to contact with any questions. Okay, so this was with a sleep lab  that we worked with all the time with a sleep doctor that is very comfortable working with,  very friendly with. And note that in the conclusions and in the recommendations, it doesn't  say what the problem was. The problem was what? Supine sleep, okay? In the sleep lab,  particularly at this time, they asked patients to sleep on their back, okay? It mentioned  there in the notes, there was both supine sleep and REM sleep. It was normal for the  sleep tech to say, "Hey, patient, please try to sleep on your back as much as you can."  Why? Because they wanted to see them at their worst. Again, harken back to the story of  my dad and him saying that the sleep study was invalid because he never slept on his  back at home, which was true.  [0:20:03]  I never saw my dad sleep on his back at home. He always slept on his side. Okay, in this  case too, this patient didn't sleep on his side, on his back either. Now, initially, because he  couldn't, because he was stopping breathing, dang near 100 times an hour if he slept on  his back. So as soon as he would roll onto his back, he would obstruct, his brain would be  like, this is no fun, kick him over onto his side. But he'd gotten used to sleeping on his side  because of that. So with his oral appliance in place, he slept on his side. Now, we don't  have the data to support this because in this follow-up sleep study, he was 100% on his  back. But it's logical to assume, and the patient felt like a million bucks with his oral appli -  ance, and he wasn't snoring. So with the oral appliance in place on his side, he didn't have  sleep apnea. Okay, so remember, in the baseline study, he had moderate, mid-moderate.  09/01/25   Page   of 6   8

SSC 2.0 - 218: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Study #1  So it was 24 AHI, but on his side, it was lower. That 24 was kicked up because of that 88  on his back.  [0:21:12]  So prior, with nothing, his AHI was more in the 20 range on his side. With oral appliance  now, it was likely below 5, if not even 0 I had to point this out to the sleep doctor. I had to  call up the sleep doctor. I'm like, hey, man, it looks like he didn't have a really great experi -  ence. However, or a great result with the oral appliance. However, let's go back to his  baseline. What do you think his AHI would have been if he would have slept on his back all  night? And the sleep doctor's like, "Well, I don't know. I don't think he could have slept on  his back all night, but way over 100, that's for sure." You know, it was 88 just in those five  minutes that we're able to capture, or 5%, excuse me, that we're able to capture. It'd be  way over 100. Okay, well, now if we've taken him to 20 from 100, I'm more happy with that.  But that's still not the case because that AHI of 20 is on his back. He doesn't sleep on his  back. Okay, so this is another case, and we did a HST with this patient just to confirm and  had him do it at home, and we just kind of kept it to ourselves, and his AHI was 0 because  he was on his side all night long with the oral appliance, and he did great.  Review Sheet   [0:22:37]  Okay, so this is your sleep review sheet that you have in your document center for  Spencer Study Club, and I strongly encourage you, if you're more of a beginner, to go  through your first 10, 20, 30 studies with this sheet until you get really good at looking for  these things. Okay, so it goes through all of the different stuff to look for, and you're able to  compare your baseline to your oral appliance study and really kind of figure out what's go -  ing on yourself, and then when you're building your relationship with sleep doctors too,  again, I didn't call up the sleep doctor and be like, hey, stupid sleep doctor, how did you  miss that he spent no time basically, supine on the baseline study, and this one was 100%  supine? Don't you think that that would have an impact? I didn't do that.  [0:23:29]  What I did do was I just called up and said, "Hey, just kind of looking at this, could this  have made a difference? What do you think about this? I noticed this. What do you think?"  And the sleep doctor was like, "Oh yeah, oh my gosh, yeah, totally. This guy's doing  great." That makes more sense because he says he's doing great. The AHI didn't look that  great by comparison, but when we take into account the supine stuff, that makes a huge  difference, okay? So that is a good case of supine dependent sleep apnea, which you will  see over and over and over and over and over and over and over again. Getting people off  of their back is really important. And if you learn from this and see this in advance, if you've  got a patient, it's like, dang, you are way worse on your back. Let's get you off your back.  And let's say they're going to go in for a PSG. And let's say the sleep lab is kind of old  school. They got an old school tech in there that still tells people sleep on your back.  09/01/25   Page   of 7   8

SSC 2.0 - 218: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Study #1  [0:24:30]  You would say to the patient, "Hey, do you sleep on your back at home? You don't? Okay,  you're on your side now? Awesome." In the sleep lab, they may ask you to sleep on your  back. Just sleep on your side, okay? Because we want to know what the real results are.  And we don't want them on their back if they're not sleeping on their back. Super duper  critically important.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 8   8

