SSC 2.0 - 219: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Studies 2 & 3  SSC 2.0   Level 2  219: Understanding Sleep Studies;  Case Studies 2 & 3  [intro music]  Case Study 2 - Page 1   [0:00:12]  Okay, let's move on to case two. Another oldie but a goodie here. All right, 2013, this is  another PSG. Total recording time, 495 minutes, 427 minutes of sleep with an efficiency of  87%. On our sleep architecture says all sleep stages noted with a shift to light non-REM  stages. REM sleep was 15%. So that's an interesting way to kind of say that without giving  the exact numbers. Respiratory analysis, mild obstructive sleep apnea, AHI of 11, low O2  of 81%. And impressions, final diagnosis, obstructive sleep apnea, recommendation CPAP,  titration, and trial with our AHI of 11.  Page 2   [0:01:02]  All right, so let's look at this, a little different presentation here. So we have our height in  inches and the weight. So say thinner woman, 21.7 BMI, 60-year-old female. Here's our  total sleep time, sleep efficiency again. Here they have a pie chart for the sleep stages  with wake and 1, 2, and 3, and stage REM. So here they're kind of breaking down the dif -  ferent percentages. Once again, going through that N1 of 20% is a little what? A little high,  a little low? That's high. Stage 2 is 59%. It looks like there is that high or low. That's a little  high.  [0:01:52]  Stage 3, 5.3%. High or low? That is low. And stage REM sleep is 14.8. High or low? That  is low. Now we got a 60-year-old female, so the stage N3, as I've said, at age 40 and be -  yond, that can be completely gone. That could account for that. Then we have our supine  as a percent of total sleep time here. Supine sleep was 56%. Supine REM, 5.9. Non-REM,  50%. Non-spine, 43.9%. Non-spine REM and non-spine non-REM. Here we have our  sleep histogram. Down here, the bars are REM sleep. Wake is below that. Then we have  stage 1, 2, and 3. So you see the more deep sleep at the first part of the night and more  REM sleep in the second part of the night.  Page 3   [0:02:55]  09/01/25   Page   of 1   8

SSC 2.0 - 219: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Studies 2 & 3  Restorative disturbances summary. We have our REM events, non-REM, and wake  events. Here they have their apneas broken into obstructive, central, and mixed. AHI over -  all of 10.8. We have 20 obstructive events in the total REM events, 20 obstructive REM  events, 20 of those supine, 0 non-supine. Okay, interesting. Non-REM events, we have 14  total.  [0:03:21]  Supine was 11. 3 of those non-supine. Wake events, none. Total events, REM and non-  REM event total was 34. Supine was 31, and non-supine was 3. So what are you looking  at here as far as the obstructive apneas go? Is it more of a supine issue or non-supine is -  sue? It's clearly more supine. Going over here to hypopneas, we had in REM events, 6, all  supine. Non-REM, we had 37, 33 of those supine. Total events is 43. So looking at that,  we had 34 obstructive, 43 hypopneas. So do we have more hypopneas than we have ob -  structive apneas? Yes. However, this person, they're relatively close. So 43 and 34, that's  about a 60-40 split there of hypopneas to apneas. That one has quite a few. But if you told  the patient the same way as I said before, breathe in, out, in, out, flat line, that was 34  times, breathe in, breathe out hypopnea line, that was 43. You stopped breathing 34 times  throughout the entire study. That's probably going to be more realistic to them than to say  you stopped breathing 11 times per hour because their bed partner would not say that that  was true.  [0:05:03]  Okay, so we've got the idea here. We definitely have more supine events than anything  else. So supine events, 39 on hypopneas, 31 on the apneas add those up. We got 70  events total on the supine, only 7 non-supine. This person has supine-related obstructive  sleep apnea. Okay, oxygen summary here. The average is 94. The minimum was 81. And  let's see, normally it will give us like some time below that, but I don't see that here. Oh,  here we go. Minutes of the total recording time with the SaO2 less than 90 was 9 minutes,  less than 88 was 4.2 minutes. All right, that should do it.  Page 4   [0:06:00]  Here's another look at that sleep histogram with not just sleep stages, but here we have  the sleep stages up here with the REM bars at the top again. Then we have snores. We  have heart rate. We have PLMs. We have the limb movement there, apnea, apnea index,  and the desaturations. And so you can see every time there's the black bars of the REM,  you'll tend to have more of the apneas, hypopneas, more of the desaturations.  [0:06:35]  We don't see those quite as much in the morning hours there. The snores, don't know if  there was something wrong with that recording, we don't see a lot of those. The arousals,  we get a lot of those correlated with the REM activity there. So these are nice to see for  09/01/25   Page   of 2   8

SSC 2.0 - 219: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Studies 2 & 3  you and to show your patient also how all of these things kind of work together. Down here  at the bottom we have body position, so like upright and right side, back. So here it's like  on the back the entire night there for that first part there and then kind of roll over and then  on the back again and then on their side.  Page 5   & 6   [0:07:21]  Okay, so now this person also got a sleep appliance, happened to be an EMA. We've got  all the standard protocol stuff at the top again. We have a 60-year-old female previously  diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea in 2013 with an AHI of 11. No significant limb  movements. All right, medications. Again, same on the weight. Really skinny neck. Okay,  study was excellent. Two episodes of nocturia, so the patient had to get up to go to the  bathroom twice during the night. Moderate snoring present. Patient was titrated 19 blue to  17 blue to 15 blue to 14 yellow back to 15 blue. That's their morning questionnaire, sleep  architecture, total sleep time 392, sleep efficiency 91%, which is pretty darn high consider -  ing how many times they got woke up to change the band.  Page 7   [0:08:23]  All right, sleep architecture, this is with your oil appliance, N1 of 0, which is weird. Okay, so  that's obviously low, and particularly considering that the patient was woken up a whole  bunch of times, you would have thought you'd see more N1, not less. N2 46, about nor -  mal. N3 31%, well, that's fantastic for a 60-year-old. Although with N3, that's one of those  where if it's too high, you're like, what's going on here? What's the body trying to do with  this being so high? And remember, all of these studies are typically snapshots of a night,  so we can't say that this is what their sleep is every night. All of us that track our sleep  every night know that there's variability, and a lot goes into this, so it is a snapshot. Never -  theless, the sleep doctor is going to make some determinations based on that, so 31%  deep sleep in a 60-year-old is high.  [0:09:23]  REM sleep 23%, that's right in there, right? Body position 84% of the night on the back,  16% of the night non-spine, probably once again because told to sleep on their back. Peri -  odic limb movements, respiratory, using the 14-millimeter blue bands, the patient spent 72,  or slept 72 minutes, including time in stage REM as well as on their back. During that 72  minutes, they had 1 obstructive apnea, 14 hypopneas, so we get our AHI of 12.5. Now,  again, what was the AHI before? Well, the AHI before was 11 without the oral appliance,  so here we're saying that with the oral appliance in the best band, that seemed to be that  14, so as I mentioned before, in this patient on her baseline study, she had about 60% hy -  popnea, 40% apnea. That's relatively high on the apnea part. Well, now with the EMA,  09/01/25   Page   of 3   8

SSC 2.0 - 219: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Studies 2 & 3  what's that ratio? So 1 apnea to 14 hypopneas. So at this point, she doesn't really have  obstructive sleep apnea per se. It's more just those hypopneas, okay? Our AHI, that's the  problem with AHI, right, is it's really not telling that whole story that I think there's a differ -  ence between someone who has full-on apnea and someone who has hypopneas. Okay,  the SpO2 was basically fine.  Page 8   [0:11:02]  All right, so the conclusion is basically didn't work and patient should go back on CPAP. So  we already pointed out that we've got a lot less apneas. Now it's more hypopnic. Let's look  at kind of go back some slides here and remind ourselves on the supine. So we had in this  study, we had, let's see, body position right there, 84% of the night in the supine position.  And then remember, we also had 23% REM sleep with the oral appliance in. Now let's go  back to the original sleep study. And we had virtually all of the events were supine, re -  member? So almost all of the hypopneas and apneas. We had a total events of 77 total  with 70 of those events being supine, 7 non-supine. And let's find here on the how much  time was spent. I think that's on the page before. So this is percent total sleep time. Supine  was 56%. Non-supine is 43.9%. And then in our REM, stage REM, we had 14%. So in this  new study we have with the EMA, we have more REM. So 14% REM, or let's round that  up, 15% REM. And then supine sleep is 56%.  [0:12:43]  Now we'll go forward. And with the EMA titration, we had 23% REM. So more REM. What's  that? 8% more REM. And then 84% supine versus roughly 54%. So about 30% more  supine sleep. So with more supine sleep, more REM sleep, more opportunity to have ob -  structive events, obstructive and hypopneic events, the obstructive apneas are significantly  down. It's more hypopneic. The patient, of course, was feeling better. So what we did is we  continued to treat her. She had no interest in going back on CPAP. We treat her a little bit  longer. And then we did a home sleep test. This is not one that was read by a board-certi -  fied sleep doctor. This is one that we used on our own just to kind of follow up. Because,  again, the PSG results did not seem consistent with the patient's subjective and objective  report from home. So what we found on doing a home study was our AHI was 5.1. That  sounds a lot better, right? Supine, even more supine. So 70% supine. That's where virtual -  ly all of the apneas and hypopneas occurred. She doesn't like to sleep on her side that  much. She's only 24% on her side.  [0:14:18]  On her side, she had an AHI of 1.1. Now, overall, we're right around that so-called normal  level. But what could we do with this patient? What would be the likely most effective thing  as far as getting her closer to 0 apneas and hypopneas? Trying to get her off her back. So  that's what we learned from all of this is if we could help this person stay off her back, that  would make a tremendous difference. Would that have made a tremendous difference in  09/01/25   Page   of 4   8

SSC 2.0 - 219: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Studies 2 & 3  the sleep lab too? If we would have focused on that and like, hey, can we get you off your  back, maybe use a pillow, do something that gets you on your side prior to the sleep study,  what would her age have been in the follow-up sleep study? Well, obviously, it would have  been much, much better. So watch for that. You're going to see this over and over and  over and over again.  Review Sheet   [0:15:17]  And here is that same sheet with a third line on there. So we got our baseline, our oral ap -  pliance therapy. And then with the Metabyte, you'll notice on the Metabyte, there's a whole  bunch of stuff that's not applicable because we don't have sleep stages. We don't have,  really, we don't even know if they're asleep. It's the total recording time on the Metabyte.  So there are some things that are not apples to apples there. But we did this for our own  use. The sleep doctor didn't want a follow-up sleep study. If I remember correctly, the pa -  tient was just wondering how are they doing because they were feeling really good. This  can be confusing for patients, right? If you don't go into this detail and put yourself in that  patient's shoes and you're told, yeah, your AHI was 12 and now with oral appliance thera -  py, it's basically 12 or it's 11 point something. Well, that sounds like there was no differ -  ence at all. And there was a difference. There was a actually tremendous improvement,  but not if we only focus on the AHI and we don't break that down and we don't look at how  that was. So that is, again, up to us. That's why we're going through these case studies is  to help you with that.  Case Study 3 - Page 1   [0:16:37]  Okay, let's move on to case three. Another older PSG, 70-year-old dude, previous history  of severe obstructive sleep apnea. This is coming in for a repeat CPAP titration. So here  he's going to be put on CPAP. They did this as a split night study. So a split night study is  where the first half of the night is spent diagnosing the person and then the second half is  treating them. So if they have sleep apnea, then they wake them up after a few hours of  gathering that baseline data and then they put them on the CPAP. So this is gonna be  shorter amount of time that we're gonna have on our diagnostics. And then they're gonna  put 'em on the CPAP. So total recording period before initiating a CPAP was approximately  300 minutes with only 146 minutes of sleep time. That's not very much, right? Entire study  lasted for 479 minutes. Total sleep time of 268 minutes, also not very good. Sleep efficien -  cy 56%, that's a bad night, right? Yeah, he was awake 44% of the night and he's 70 years  old to boot. So I don't think he was very happy driving home from this experience here.  Sleep stage architecture at stage 1, 22%, kind of makes sense because he was woken up  a whole bunch of times there.  09/01/25   Page   of 5   8

SSC 2.0 - 219: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Studies 2 & 3  [0:18:01]  Stage 2, 70%, that's really high. REM sleep 7.3%, apparently didn't get any deep sleep at  all. During the initial portion of the study, the patient had 213 apneas, wow, and hypopneas  recorded together. We'll have to look at the other sheet here to break those down. Apnea  hypopnea index was severely elevated, 87.2%. So this is just the first part of the study.  The patient was supine for the initial portion of the study prior to initiating CPAP. So it's all  on his back. With respect to the patient's breakdown of sleep disorder breathing, he had 9,  oh here it is, here's the together here, 9 obstructive apneas, 76 central apneas, yo-oh, and  90 mixed apneas as well as 38 hypopneas. Hmm, okay, so this guy only stopped breathing  9 times during that period from an obstructive event standpoint, but 76 times brain forgot to  tell him to breathe. That's no bueno, yes? We aren't excited about central apneas. Now  CPAP doesn't really treat central apneas either. If your brain is forgetting to tell you to  breathe, just blowing room air into you doesn't make you breathe either. But nevertheless,  put him on CPAP. So CPAP was initiated beginning pressure of 5, brought that up to 13.  [0:19:27]  13 Normalized the apnea-apnea index to 2, but the patient did not achieve supine position -  ing during REM sleep at the very end of the study. So we didn't get our supine REM that  they were hoping for, but had way the heck less events and apparently very few, if any, of  these central events. So they put him on the 13%... Excuse me. 13 centimeters of water  pressure for CPAP.  Page 2   [0:19:56]  All right, goes through the oxygen stuff there. Let's skip to the impression. Severe obstruc -  tive sleep apnea syndrome with overall AHI of 87.2 during the split night study titrated  CPAP normalization of the apnea-apnea index. Okay, got some other stuff there. All right,  so this is definitely a person that would not typically be referred for oral appliance therapy.  Not only does he have quite severe sleep apnea, but in this baseline he had a lot of cen -  tral apneas.  Page 3 & 4   [0:20:27]  Nevertheless, he got referred into us. So backing up here, so actually it says right here,  don't need backup. So in 2007, he got that first study. So now we are seven years later in  2014. He's 77 years old. Does sleep apnea tend to get better or worse as we get older?  Well, it tends to get worse, right? So seven years has passed. He had super-duper severe  sleep apnea, a lot of centrals, and he's like, "No, not using CPAP. This is terrible." And so  they referred him to us for oral appliance therapy. This guy happened to be fit with a tap  appliance and was using this and was apparently doing pretty well. So we send him back  09/01/25   Page   of 6   8

SSC 2.0 - 219: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Studies 2 & 3  for a follow-up with the tap appliance. BMI is 26, so he's relatively normal weight. That's  just into overweight category. Neck is 16. Comments on technical notes. Here's the titra -  tion. Patient was titrated from a position of four turns to 8 turns to 12 turns to 16 turns to 20  turns back to 16 turns and the addition of supplemental oxygen was added at 2 liters per  minute. So they cranked him forward with that appliance. It sounds like every four turns  was a millimeter. So he was brought forward one, two, three, four millimeters and then  back to the third millimeter. See how he did. Here's his sleep latency, total sleep time,  awakenings. The patient felt awake and white alert overall, thought it was a worse night's  sleep than usual.  [0:22:14]  No kidding. Total sleep time 300 minutes, sleep efficiency 63%, so better than the first one  anyway. And stages N1 5%, is that high or low? That's normal. N2 81%, high or low?  That's high. N3 4%, high or low? Low, but he's 77 years old. Stage REM 10%, high or low?  That is low. Body position 35, 3% I think, 33%, 35%, one of those. Hard to see on my  computer here. Of the night spent in the supine position, 65% non-supine.  Page 5 & 6   [0:22:55]  Okay, some PLMs there. Restorative position of 8 turns, patient slept 51.5 minutes, includ -  ing time stage REM sleep, however not spine. During that 51.5 minutes at that position, he  had no apneas, no hypopneas, 0. So his apnea hypopnea index during that almost hour  was 0. His oxygen was not awesome. So 89% mean the average there dropping down to  the 80 with no apneas and no hypopneas. Curious, huh? So the patient's obstructive sleep  apnea was eliminated using the TAPS appliance. No apneas, no hypopneas, but did feel  that the supplemental oxygen was a good idea because he was still having that DSAT in  spite of having no apneic events and no hypopneic events.  [0:23:49]  So there you go. There's a positive case. Now you may be thinking, well, what happened  to all the centrals? I don't know. So the centrals just appeared on that first baseline study.  The fact that they went away completely with CPAP would have made me think that they  would probably go away with oral appliance therapy too. And the mechanism of that is not  completely understood, but just the fact that they did, that the person didn't continue to  have central events on CPAP, because sometimes they do. And sometimes they get cen -  tral events on CPAP called CPAP or therapy-induced central sleep apnea, sometimes  called complex sleep apnea. This guy didn't do that. So the centrals, I'm sure it wasn't just  an artifact. They were real because a central is very clear. It's lack of effort, lack of airflow.  So with a PSG, we know for sure what a central looks like, but just in these follow-up on  the CPAP and on the oral appliance didn't have that. So there's a kind of a nice success  story there. You're always happy when you get a patient with an AHI of 0. Now you may be  wondering, why is it that they just give that period of like 52 minutes?  09/01/25   Page   of 7   8

SSC 2.0 - 219: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Studies 2 & 3  [0:25:14]  Well, because that's what they're doing and that's what they're used to doing with CPAP,  by the way. So let me teach this principle that you may not have known before. With a tra -  ditional CPAP titration, they're turning up the CPAP as they go through the night. And when  it will say that the CPAP, on CPAP, the patient's AHI was 0, that will be during that period of  time where they had it at the pressure that worked the best. And that's it. So they might  have started it at 5 centimeters, like I said, and gone up to 13. But at 13, the patient slept  for however many minutes. And that will be when the AHI was whatever. They don't say on  CPAP, because the patient was on CPAP that whole period there, the AHI was 9. They just  say, well, "Hey, once we got him titrated, that's what the AHI was." So they do the same  thing with oral appliances. They're not really counting, per se, the times when there are the  apneas, hypopneas, until they've adjusted the oral appliance to the right position where it  seems to work the best. And then that's the data they're going to give you. That makes  sense. That helps you too. Notice in this case too, it was like they went past it and they  came backwards. Why did they do that? Well, because the patient probably got worse as  they went farther forward. And so then they just dropped back out of the oxygen and that  worked out really good.  Review Sheet   [0:26:44]  Okay, so that's a cool case. Here's our paperwork again on that. You can kind of go  through, kind of pause this for a second and see what that looks like with your little sheet  there to go through everything.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 8   8

