SSC 2.0 - 302: Initial Evaluation Part 1  SSC 2.0   Level 3  302: Initial Evaluation Part 1  [intro music]  Range of Motion - Normal and Hyper   [0:00:12]  Range of motion. So we've got our fingers or knuckles. So we've got three fingers is nor -  mal. Their fingers, 48 to 52 is rough estimate there. But remember, their fingers is the im -  portant part there. Hyper is bigger than three knuckles. So that is over 55 millimeters for  most people or their three knuckles or their entire fist. That would be hypermobile. Why do  we care about hypermobile? So hypermobile, we tend to then need to look for a few other  things like systemic hypermobility. And with systemic hypermobility, you're looking at them  being loosey-goosey in all of their joints. So the test for that is have them take their thumb  and hopefully I can kind of illustrate this. I think so. So here's my hand this way. Thumb  towards me, towards my forearm. Can I bend my thumb to my forearm? And as you can  see there, I'm nowhere close. So thumb to forearm. Another one is if I put my arm out,  does this go past flat? My elbow, in other words, does the elbow hyperextend downward?  Mine doesn't. And then the other one is, if I could bend over and put my palms on the  ground. And I assure you, I cannot. I am the farthest thing from hypermobile.  [0:01:35]  Why do we care though? So somebody who's hypermobile in all of their joints, systemic  hypermobility, they're going to be hypermobile in their jaw joints. People with hypermobile  joints tend to have more joint problems. The muscles are more activated to try to stabilize  the joints because the ligaments aren't doing their job. They can have more displacements  of tissues. They could be more prone to arthritic changes, things like that. These people  also tend to be self-selected for sports like gymnastics and dance and cheerleading and  stuff like that. And that can be very pounding. That's typically why you don't see 40-year-  olds in the Olympics for gymnastics. It's all a bunch of little kids basically or really young  women. And the women you notice are way younger than the dudes. So the dudes are  older and sometimes much older than the women. And that's because their disciplines are  very, very different. They're less pounding disciplines. Okay, so that's hyper and systemic  hypermobility, so watch for that.  Range of Motion - Reduced   [0:02:40]  09 /01/25   Page   of 1   10

SSC 2.0 - 302: Initial Evaluation Part 1  Reduced two fingers, 30 to 40 millimeters. Here we suspect that they've got a disc out of  place and it has been for a long time. So when you suspect a chronic non-reducing disc  displacement, okay? Non-reducing displacement, disc is out of place, has been for a long  time, ask them some questions. Those questions are, do you remember your jaw ever  popping and clicking on you? Like on a regular basis, you'd open your mouth and pop,  pop, pop. You know, kind of on a regular basis, it would pop every day, it would pop. You  ever remember a time like that? And that's when they will often say, oh yeah, you know,  when I got out of braces, my jaw used to pop and click all the time. Okay, do you ever re -  member like it kind of catching on you, kind of getting stuck a little bit, having to move your  jaw a little bit? Oh yeah, man, in college, that used to happen all the time, drive me crazy.  And then just last question, how long have you been squashing big sandwiches? And then  they'll be like, hmm, yeah, maybe 10 years I've been squashing big sandwiches. That is  the history of a chronic non-reducing displacement. Popping and clicking, moving to catch -  ing, moving to stuck, no more popping and clicking, reduce range of motion.  [0:03:48]  Okay, that's someone in the 30s. Now, I don't know how before now, how often you mea -  sure people's opening, but if you're new to Spencer Study Club, I can guarantee you that  you've never thought anything abnormal about people opening in the upper 30s, okay, or  low 40s. You're just kind of like, yeah, small mouth, right? Okay, from now on, it could be a  small mouth, but that would go along with their three fingers. So if they open 38, but they  could do, ah, okay, cool, that's their normal. But if they open 38 and that's only two fingers,  almost assuredly, they have a non-reducing displacement. Now, is that gonna change how  you treat them? It could. It's gonna depend on what you're doing. You just learned that  their foundation has some problems. So maybe before you remodel their house, maybe  before you add another story, maybe before you do orthodontics or full mouth reconstruc -  tion, you wanna confirm what you suspect's going on, maybe with an MRI, which we'll talk  about in a bit, but you suspect that there's some issue going on there. Now you just need  to know.  Range of Motion - Limited   [0:04:56]  Limited, 26 millimeters. Now, this is the only specific number you're gonna see in this sec -  tion, and the reason it's 26 millimeters is because I'll be darned if it is not almost always 26  millimeters. My theory on that is that's about how wide you can open with just pure rotation  of the condyle without much translation at all. And again, very common, 26. Now, if it's 27,  28, 24, 25, right around there, then that's probably it. And especially if their jaw deflects to  one side, okay, go back to level one, watch that again. So 26 millimeters and deflection,  that is classic acute non-reducing disc displacement. And then that would be someone that  my jaw used to pop and click. It would catch them every once in a while. Two weeks ago, I  woke up stuck and can't open it fully anymore. And my jaw's off the side, kind of hurts.  09 /01/25   Page   of 2   10

SSC 2.0 - 302: Initial Evaluation Part 1  That would be a classic acute non-reducing disc displacement. We have in level three  here too, the injections outside the deep dark hole. So we'll go into unlocking procedures  and all that kind of stuff. But you might need to go back to level one just to refresh your  memory of that. Although I'll go over that too. And I'm talking about the procedure.  Range of Motion - Severely Limited   [0:06:06]  And then last is severely limited, less than 20 millimeters. And it tends to be more close to  like 10 millimeters. That's about one finger width. And here we need to suspect trismus af -  ter an inferior alveolar nerve block. Now this is going to be dang near every time in your  practice anyway, that this is going to be the case, because you're a dentist. So therefore  you're given lots of IAs and 1 in maybe a 1,000, maybe as high as 10,000 is going to have  a reaction to hitting their medial pterygoid, which you do probably every day on one patient  or another. But most people don't have a negative response to that. They have a little bit of  a response of just a little bit of tenderness in the area, but they don't have a clenched  down of the muscle of trismus. That's the one finger width almost always after an inferior  alveolar nerve block in our world. So be watching for that. That's back in level one, but just  in a nutshell, that's going to be physical therapy and a MedDraw dose pack or maybe  even, and I don't know if anyone has done this yet, but this makes sense to me, PRF.  [0:07:13]  So if you're set up to do PRF, you would actually go back in there, try to hit their medial  pterygoid on purpose and give them a PRF injection and then send them to physical ther -  apy. That almost for sure is going to take care of it. If this happened to a family member, I  would do that rather than the MedDraw dose pack. I would do PRF back into that area,  give the body a better ability to heal rather than putting them on a systemic steroid that's  going to do who knows what to the rest of their body, rest of their tissues. I'm semi anti-  drug as I've mentioned to you before. I think Nancy Reagan, when I was growing up, she  said, don't do drugs. And that really kind of hit me. So I'm pretty anti-drug in general. And  with PRF, I'll tell you that anything that kind of happens for me or my family, PRF is often  the first thought process I have. I had an area on my forearm that was hurting and I'm like,  you know, going to Dr. YouTube and stuff like that and found out that it might be a brachial  tunnel syndrome.  [0:08:21]  Whenever there's syndrome, it's mean lots of people have this. We're not exactly positive  what's going on, but here's a theory about it. So it's like carpal tunnel syndrome, right? So  it's a tunnel up here for your brachial nerve. And that sometimes when you're turning your  hand or stuff like that, that hurts in there. And it was bothering me for a couple months and  I was doing everything I could and I'm doing red light therapy and I'm trying to be careful  when I'm lifting weights and stuff to not irritate it. And that was kind of the weird part is I  could do curls and whatnot and it wouldn't hurt. But then I pick up my laptop and that  09 /01/25   Page   of 3   10

SSC 2.0 - 302: Initial Evaluation Part 1  would about kill. If I pinched and just picked up, that would really, really tweak it. So ulti -  mately I go to my physical therapist. We refer TMJ patients to every day and I hadn't done  PRF. I was thinking about it, but you know, PRF at this point in my life, I don't have the  centrifuge and the butterfly needles and stuff like that here at my house. At some point I  will.  [0:09:19]  Our families literally talked about that. It's like, dad, we should have a centrifuge here at  the house in case any of us have a problem because my daughter-in-law, Allie, knows how  to draw blood and we do the protocol. We just have everything here and I could inject it  wherever. I'm pretty good with anatomy. So I probably will have that pretty quick. But as of  this recording, I don't have that. So I would have to go to my office and have my partner  Kevin help me and stuff like that. So I go to my physical therapist and she did some crazy  rubbing stuff in the area and some dry needling acupuncture stuff up in my neck and other  areas. And at the end, she's like, all right, do something that would make that hurt. And I  tried a couple of things and I'm like, okay, so exercises or anything? She's like, no, I think  that's it. I think I got it. I don't think you're having a problem anymore. And that's a week  ago and no problem. So fun, right? So that's just a little story of how I would probably use  PRF. If the physical therapy wouldn't have got it better, I would have used PRF.  [0:10:17]  Never in my story of my muscle hurting there was I taking Advil. Because again, I know  enough to know that Advil is not going to help heal the situation. That's maybe going to  make it feel better, but not help heal it. That's how I think. That's how you're going to think  too, okay? So back to Trismus, just watch for it again. As of 2025, I don't think that I would  do the MedDraw dose pack. I would do PRF. If you don't have the ability to do the PRF,  then anti-inflammatories, get them to the physical therapist. They're going to stretch them  open much more so than the patient's going to. All right, that's our range of motion stuff.  Get yourself a ruler, and remember though, fingers is more important than the number on  the ruler because every patient is going to have a different opening. And that maximum  opening is going to be potentially normal for them. So we need to measure their opening  based on their opening, not just standards across people, because a six foot eight dude is  going to be different than a four foot eight woman. They're going to have different ranges  of motion.  Initial Examination   [0:11:30]  All right, let's talk about initial examination. For most people doing what I call a T1 and T2,  so a initial TMD1 and TMD2 for the comprehensive, so initial exam, comprehensive exam,  that's going to be the way you're probably going to do it. And let me actually go into a little  bit of detail about that before I go into this other stuff. Now the range of motion was also  part of our initial examination. Let me explain my why behind doing an initial and then a  09 /01/25   Page   of 4   10

SSC 2.0 - 302: Initial Evaluation Part 1  comprehensive exam. And it's because TMD is more on the medical side of stuff. But even  let's think about just how you do things as a restorative dentist, as a general dentist. You  have a patient and you do your examination. Now sometimes if the time has passed to  where you need imaging, I would imagine that you would get imaging right up front. I be -  lieve in dental school that we would get a full mouth series of x-rays pretty close to the be -  ginning of their evaluation. There was, of course, your emergency type of people or what -  ever where you did a visual examination first to kind of narrow it down.  [0:13:05]  They came in with a toothache or something like that. But pretty rapidly in the process  there, you would get some sort of either full mouth series typically, or in your practice, you  may get a panoramic x-ray right off the bat and then decide what other x-rays you're going  to get. And then you use that objective measurements, those objective films, to guide your  diagnosis and treatment planning, right? With TMD, it should be the same. And just doing  it purely based on your examination or your history with the patient and then going into, all  right, let's do this for a treatment plan is a little weird. And it's not consistent also with the  typical medical model, which would be, tell me your history, let's do some basics, and then  let's get deeper objective measures, get the report back from those objective measures,  make our plan. That is more normal, right? So I think it's been a couple years ago at this  point, but I went in to have my back checked out. And there was one place I went and they  do some cool procedures and stuff there. They do some regenerative medicine stuff like  we do now with PRF and whatnot.  [0:14:35]  They were doing PRP. I think actually they did do a little PRF and they were doing some  other bone marrow aspirate concentrate injections and A2M and some cool stuff. But there  was a little disconnect for me because the examination, which was done by a nurse practi -  tioner, was very quick, took my history, what's hurting, kind of show her, she pushes a little  bit, says, okay, here's what I think's going on, and we can start you right now. Okay, like,  here you go. And again, that was a little strange because typically, so there are no objec -  tive anything done. So there are no x-rays, no MRI. And I brought it up. I'm like, so  wouldn't it be maybe nice if you think that I have this facet issue or you think that I have  this disc issue, wouldn't it be good to maybe get an MRI and confirm that as well as to  have a baseline so that when you do the treatment, we could then later look at how we  did? And she said, well, sure, it wouldn't really change how I treat you. And I said, I get  that, but I'm doing this stuff in my practice and it's always nice for us to have objective  measures and pretreatment records.  [0:16:01]  And she's like, okay, that's cool. Go ahead, go get your MRI. Didn't offer to order it or any -  thing like that because again, they're outside of the medical insurance type of system with  their practice. And so that's kind of like, huh, yeah, interesting. Then I went a couple weeks  later to the University of Utah. There, the experience is very different. There, I had my chief  complaint, went in, and I don't think actually anyone took an initial history if I remember  correctly. I mean, they knew I was there for back pain, that much they knew. Actually, I  09 /01/25   Page   of 5   10

SSC 2.0 - 302: Initial Evaluation Part 1  think maybe they did. I think maybe, and I don't know what they were. I don't know if they  were a medical assistant or what, but somebody, I think, just basically like, hey, so you're  here for low back pain, right? Yes. Okay, follow me. We're going to go in here and get  some x-rays. And then we went in, and they took a bunch of different x-rays with me in  flexion and extension and back and front side and stuff like that. And then they put those x-  rays up, so to speak.  [0:17:10]  These weren't physical x-rays anymore, but they had them all up on a screen, right, just  like you would with a pano nowadays or a cone beam CT or full mouth series or whatever  you got. And they put it up, and when the nurse practitioner or PA came in, he kind of said  hello and then immediately looked at the x-rays and kind of gathered some information  there, and then sat down and talked to me. And then it was decided, okay, what's the next  step? And the next step was going to be an MRI. Now, actually, they're like, hey, I was do -  ing okay by then. So they're like, yeah, a little bit of arthritic changes here and a little bit  here. But if you're doing good, really there's nothing for us to do right now. And if you want  regenerative medicine stuff, there's only one guy in our whole group that does that, and  you could see him if you wanted to. But the reason, the thought process was flowing from  subjective opinion, objective x-rays, consideration of more objective studies, being an MRI,  and then ultimately what are we going to do about it.  [0:18:26]  Okay, so back to you. The nice thing about doing an initial evaluation and then going to a  comprehensive examination is it flows with this. Plus, if you are a sleep dentist or restora -  tive dentist, I'll assume that you're not a, I only do TMD, although we have multiple  Spencer Study Club members who were heavy TMD and still joined Spencer Study Club  to learn more about sleep or just to learn more in general or, pick up a couple pearls here  and there. But assuming that's not you, that you're not just pure TMD, and even if you are,  bear with me here on why I think that you might consider this. But if you are a restorative  dentist or a sleep dentist, you are usually doing your initial evaluation on a patient that's  come in for something else. So they are there for restorative dentistry. They're there for  general dentistry. They're there for preventative dentistry. They're there normal recall,  right? And you're going through this like, hmm, Jamison, I think you might have a problem.  Here's what we need to do, though. We need to get and then, hey, Cone beam CT or I  need this or I need to send you for an MRI or whatever.  [0:19:45]  You'll let me get a couple things here real quick and explain the why behind these things.  And then we're going to get this objective measures. You know, in the case of a Cone  beam CT or an MRI, I'm going to have that read by a radiologist. And then we're going to  get you back in and spend longer with you on a comprehensive examination. Is that okay?  So that's how I would do it if I were you, because then it's not taking a whole bunch of  time. You can do this initial evaluation stuff very quickly and then you can get them back  for that more comprehensive examination and take your time and have time for the radiol -  ogist to read the x-rays or get them in and back from an MRI and all that kind of stuff. And  09 /01/25   Page   of 6   10

SSC 2.0 - 302: Initial Evaluation Part 1  it will be more logical to the patient, too, versus palpate for two seconds, be like, oh, I think  you need splint therapy or, oh, I think you need PRF because of this one thing that I see  here. Okay? So that's my take on initial evaluation to comprehensive examination. Now,  some of the things you need to do on your initial examination, though, is to have a pretty  good idea of what's going on. And I like to tell people that the initial evaluation is to make  sure that they're not wasting their time or money. They're in the right place. We can help  them. That's really the key behind this.  Initial Examination - Spray and Stretch   [0:21:10]  And this spray and stretch procedure now is part of this. And I call this show people you  can help them by actually helping them. Okay? Also, spray and stretch is helpful for de -  termining site and source of pain. So let's say that the person's pain is over their jaw joint.  They point to their jaw joint and say, it hurts here. Here's what I'm going to do. So we've  got kind of the old bottle of ethyl chloride there. You're going to use probably fluo -  romethane now or so I've got this Gebauer's Instant Ice is on the screen here. You can get  that from Amazon. That's what we use now. And here's what you're going to do. You're go -  ing to spray it over the place it hurts. So in this case, the jaw joint. So I noticed that I've got  my thumb over her ear hole. And that's so I don't squirt the cold stuff in to her ear, which  would be uncomfortable to say the least.  [0:22:13]  So protect their ear. Then you spray on your finger and their jaw joint. And this is some -  thing also I have gloves on here, but you might consider doing this ungloved. The reason I  have gloves on in this picture is you may have seen this picture before on doing a unlock -  ing procedure, so doing an injection on this young lady. So the spray to do this with your,  at least as a beginner, to do it with your hand there and spray your hand. And if you're giv -  ing yourself frostbite, then you're giving the patient frostbite. So maybe the first 10, 20 of  these that you do, don't wear gloves, spray your hand as part of spraying their face. And if  you're thinking, well, that's way too cold on my hand, then you're probably doing it too  slow, too much. So you're just going to go spray, it's about this fast, spray, spray, spray, not  spraaaay like that. Okay, so it's like push down, spray, stop, spray, stop, spray. And then  I'm going to say open, close, open wide, close, open wide, close, relax, spray, stop, spray,  stop, spray, stop, open wide, close, open wide, close, open wide, close. One more time.  Spray, stop, spray, stop, spray, stop, open wide, close, open wide, close, open wide, close,  relax.  [0:24:20]  Then, as it says here on the last bullet point, you're going to ask some questions, but  you're going to pause for a second. Okay, so count to 5 or 10 in your mind. Don't immedi -  ately say anything. So let kind of stuff do its thing here. And then you're going to ask, and  you're going to ask just like this, “Does that make the pain in that area worse, better, or no  09 /01/25   Page   of 7   10

SSC 2.0 - 302: Initial Evaluation Part 1  change?” Put the emphasis on worse. What you're doing with spray and stretch, is you are  affecting the gate theory of pain control phenomenon here. And that is that the fast fibers  are going to be the ones that are sending these signals. So like if you smacked your  thumb with a hammer or you got your thumb caught in something and hurt it, what would  you do? Would you just sit there and look at it and go, ow, that hurts? No, you're going to  grab it. You can go like this, like, ow, ow, right? Why do we do that? So we do that instinc -  tively because we are affecting the fast fibers. So pain fibers are slow.  [0:25:33]  They're still plenty fast to get a signal to the brain and back and stuff, but these other fibers  are faster, so we are affecting, impacting those fast fibers. That's what the cold spray does.  So the cold spray kind of overwhelms the slower pain fibers, and so theoretically they  won't feel the pain anymore, or it'll be dramatically reduced. Again, just like this, so my  thumb could still hurt quite a bit, but when I'm doing this and my thumb that I've just hit, it  feels a little better because of this other stuff that I have going on that's sort of confusing.  Again, I'm not even just sitting there like that. I'm moving the whole thing. I'm sending all of  these signals to try to kind of distract myself from the pain that's going on there. Does that  make sense? So worse, better, no change. Now, just this past weekend, we had one of  our business league groups in, and I found that one of our business league members,  who's amazing, and she has dang near doubled her practice every year for like five years  and has a limited sleep and TMD practice. And does a lot more sleep than she does TMD,  but I learned that she was not doing spray and stretch anymore,  [0:26:55]  And I asked why, and she's like, well, yeah, I just didn't see that it made that big of a differ -  ence. I'm like, okay, well, that's probably you, with all due respect, and I even checked with  my partners. I checked with Cameron and Kevin. I'm like, hey, just curious, you know, this  thing that I taught you how to do forever ago, you're still doing it? And they're like, oh yeah,  every patient. I'm like, okay, and just curious, do most people, does it help you with your  diagnosis? And I'm like, oh yeah, every time. I'm like, okay, cool. So then I'm like, yeah, for  sure it's just you. And so we went through it just like I did right there. And I said, now, be  aware that sometimes people will be a little confused, and it's not uncommon for you to  say, hey, worse, better, no change. And people to be like, hmm, worse, and or no change.  And then you have to follow up, and you're like, okay, so hold up. Cold, I understand it  feels really cold, right? Oh yeah, it feels super cold.  [0:27:50]  So does it feel cold and the pain that you had there a minute ago, is that pain worse? Or  does it feel cold and the pain is the same as it was before? Or does it feel cold and the  pain's like gone? Like you don't feel the pain anymore because you just feel the cold. And  very often the patient will be like, Oh, no, I don't feel the pain anymore. I just feel cold.  They were like saying it was worse because it was cold. And this doctor actually said that  she's like, yeah, some of my patients will say, Well, my jaw pain is worse when it's cold. It's  because of the cold. The cold breeze gets on my face and that makes it hurt. And I'm like,  okay, I get that. But that's neither here nor there. We're trying to figure out site and source.  09 /01/25   Page   of 8   10

SSC 2.0 - 302: Initial Evaluation Part 1  Now if you do the spray and they're like, no change or worse is weird. So again, worse is if  your thumb hurt and you stuck the ice pack on it, the pain is going to feel better. Now after  a bit, it might start throbbing or something with the ice on it.  [0:28:55]  But you've had this experience before. It doesn't make sense that the same thing would be  worse. It'd be a different feeling. And if someone says no change, that's also weird be -  cause there should at least be, well, it's darn cold now, right? When it really is, when  you've asked that question a couple times and the patient is clearly like, no, that doesn't  make any difference at all, then what did you probably learn? Site and source are different.  So the site of the pain, where they think it hurts and the source, not the same place. So  when we do this with myofascial pain, okay, remember back in level one, trigger point stuff,  right? So the person has the pain in the tooth and we think it's coming from a temporalis  trigger point. We've done our tooth examination. We've ruled out any tooth stuff. We pal -  pate the temporalis and then we find the spot and they're like, oh wow, that kind of hurts  there. Where does it hurt? Where my finger is? Or does it go anywhere? Well, it hurts  where your finger is, but it also hurts in that tooth. Okay?  [0:30:08]  Or, well, that hurts where your finger is and now I don't really feel the tooth as much.  There'd be something like that. Note that I hold it there, right? So I don't just palpate it and  then back off. So you hold it. They have whatever response they have that kind of leads  you to believe, hmm, these might be connected. Then we spray here, not the tooth, of  course. So we spray the muscle and then we might ask, all right, so I sprayed over that  muscle there. Does that make any difference with the discomfort? Worse? Better? No  change? And particularly kind of thinking about in the tooth, does that make anything feel  worse? Better? No change in the tooth? Why we're leaning on worse, by the way, is it  shouldn't be worse. In diagnosis, we try to minimize placebo effect. If you say, that makes  it feel better, doesn't it? That's placebo. That's placebo in diagnosis. Now, I'm all for place -  bo in treatment. You can absolutely be like, all right, this oral appliance that we fit you with  today, this is going to change your life. It might take you a little bit to get used to it and stuff  like that, but boy, once you do, I predict you won't be able to sleep without this thing.  [0:31:23]  This PRF injection we did today, this is going to harness your body's ability to heal. You  are likely going to feel really, really good, really, really fast. Might feel a little sore and stuff  from the injection and whatnot, but this is going to really engage that healing process.  You're going to do great. Cool. Do that all day long. Get their mind on board with you. This  is one of the reasons I like giving people red light therapy in conjunction with their PRF  and their splint therapy is because it's something they can do at home. And when you're  doing something at home every day, you're kind of reminding yourself, oh, I'm on this jour -  ney, I'm helping myself, right? Okay. So anyway, that's placebo effect in treatment. Cool  with that. Not cool with it in diagnosis. So do not do the whole thing. And you see this on  YouTube all the time with some of the TMJ gurus that are out there and they'll like equili -  brate somebody or something and they'll equilibrate and they'll be like, that makes you feel  09 /01/25   Page   of 9   10

SSC 2.0 - 302: Initial Evaluation Part 1  better, doesn't it? Like you feel better now, huh? And the patient's like, well, I guess for  your 50,000 YouTube followers, I guess I better say yes, or I'm probably not going to get  on the YouTube, right?  [0:32:31]  If I say no, probably you're not going to use this video, are you? In diagnosis, try to do  everything you can to minimize placebo effect. So that's why we ask questions like, worse,  better, no change. Does that do this? Tell me what happens here instead of leading the  witness. Don't lead the witness. Get good at spray and stretch. Also for you real dentists  out there, teach your hygienist how to do this and or your assistants because just doing  this at the end of an appointment and kind of having the patient open and close, open and  close, spray, spray, spray, open, close, open, close bilaterally. Now it's going to streak their  makeup if they have makeup on, but they can go to the bathroom and freshen that up a  little bit or kind of wipe off the streaks or whatever they want to do, but they're going to feel  better. Because that's going to have this effect on these muscles. It's going to relax it. You  could do the same thing with moist heat, but just the spray is so fast because it's going to  affect those fast nerve fibers.  [0:33:32]  So that's spray and stretch. Don't just poo-poo this and be like, I don't need to do that. I  don't want to have time because back to the reason for it, the person who has pain and  they've had pain for who knows how long? Weeks, months, years, this will probably most  of the time make their pain better. So then what did you just do? You showed you could  help them by actually helping them. And you're probably the first person who has. People  in the past have been like, well, here's a night guard, and then that didn't help. And they  went to the ENT, and the ENT just kind of looked in their ear and said, we don't have an  ear problem, you have TMJ, see your dentist. They didn't help. No one's helped. Chiro -  practor might have helped, but it was temporary, right? They felt kind of better leaving the  office, but then two days later, it was back to the same way as it was before, and they had  to kind of go back. And after doing that five or ten times, they're like, oh, this doesn't make  any sense. You will be one of the first people to help them by actually helping them, and  they will then trust that you are on the right track. That's spray and stretch. Get good at  this. It's important. And this is part of your initial evaluation, because then after you've done  all this, you can say, hey, you know what? Cite source, you explain why you did that, which  I'll do, so we don't have the placebo effect. Then once they say what we expect, hey, what  that means, why we did this, cite and source. We're trying to figure out if where it hurts and  where it's coming from, the same thing in your case, I think it is the same thing. By the  way, that cold feeling is kind of going to go away here pretty quick. That's going to hurt. It's  going to come back. But this is something you can do at home. You could do ice and stuff  in that area. That'll give you temporary relief of the pain. It's not going to get to the cause  of the pain, but it would give you some temporary relief using that same principle.  [outro music]  09 /01/25   Page   of 10   10

