SSC 2.0 - 305: Splints Simplified  SSC 2.0   Level 3  305: Splints Simpli fi ed  [intro music]  Splints Simplified   [0:00:12]  Let's now talk about splints, and here's my simplified way of looking at splints. There's a lot  of splints on the market, and it always blows my mind that new ones get developed. Just  recently, in the last year or two, some person I've never heard of before kind of came on  the scene doing a lot of social media stuff, mostly targeted at dentists, that he's got some  magic splint. I think the dude's in his 30s, and that he has put all this together through  these different courses he's taken and stuff like that. Whenever you see stuff like that, just  ask yourself, okay, why would that do anything if the patient had 1% occlusion, or would it?  And even if you come, if you're confronted by one of these gurus at some point, ask that  question. So the simplest way to put these people into a corner that they can't get out of is  just to say, so curious, so I see what your splint does, kind of guides the jaw into this posi -  tion and blah, blah, blah, blah, and you explain that all to me. How much time should peo -  ple spend with their teeth together?  [0:01:18]  I've never had one of these dudes say anything other than, oh, very little. And then the fol -  low-up question is, well, then doesn't that mean that this is going to work very little? Be -  cause doesn't it only work when they put their teeth together? And usually they have zero  answer. They will usually sidestep your question and kind of ignore it and then say how  their appliance opens up the cranial sutures or something like that, right? They'll just kind  of go down some other road that you're like, okay, yeah, cool. And then you could follow  up and go, but when does it do that? Wouldn't it only do that when their teeth are touch -  ing? And again, I've never had somebody with one of these magical appliances have a  good answer for that. And that's because there is no good answer for that because the an -  swer is that our patients shouldn't be having their teeth together that much. And a lot of our  patients with a problem are those who are putting their teeth together quite a bit. And re -  member, even those, those tend to be people that are our couched 5K people and not our  trained athlete people.  [0:02:20]  These are the people that are recently putting their teeth together or are more putting their  teeth together than they normally do. And that's why they are having problems because  they are these newly training athletes for their jaw muscles, jaw joints, stuff like that. Their  system can't handle it, therefore pain and dysfunction. Whereas it's possible actually that if  they just continue those behaviors even that they'll eventually get stronger. It depends.  09 /01/25   Page   of 1   16

SSC 2.0 - 305: Splints Simplified  They'll either break down or they'll get stronger, right? Just like if you were a marathon  runner. You're either going to build up and strengthen and be able to tolerate it or you  won't. And if you aren't able to, then you're going to have pain and hurt and eventually  you'll stop. This is just a little harder to stop with because we use our jaws to eat and talk  and do a bunch of fun things in life. And so therefore those pressures are still there. It's not  quite as simple as giving up running perhaps. We still are using our jaws.  “CR” and “CO” Splint   [0:03:20]  So I will define splints as CR and CO. Now I'll go ahead and say that sentence. I just about  said I'm the one that came up with this and that is true, I guess. So here's the story. And  you remember in level one when I teach about the history of CR and how confusing it is  and how if you were after 1987 like I was and I graduated in the late 90s and the definition  was anterior superior with the disc properly interposed. So that's what I would have been  taught to put down on an answer for a test. But my faculty, and this is classic for anyone  that's, well, even I would say for anyone. So as I lecture and always bring this up, again,  you may have seen this in person, and I'll say, okay, hey, anyone in the room who has  graduated dental school after 1987 gets to play. What are some of the terms for centric re -  lation? And I'll have young people, people in their 20s, early 30s, that will be like, oh yeah,  it's a rear most, upper most, terminal hinge, the repeatable position. They'll say that. And  they'll say repeatable position like that actually means something, like that's an anatomical  position, right? Repeatable just means it's repeatable, but we don't even define that. How  many times do you have to repeat it before it's repeatable?  [0:04:57]  So all of these people to this day are still being trained that CR is actually back. Like I had  someone this past weekend who she said, what if their CR is posterior to this or something  like that? And I'm like, well, that's not CR by definition. And I had to kind of explain what  that meant again. But in her mind and how she was taught in school, CR is a retruded po -  sition. So where this came from, and repeat myself here to kind of put this into you here, is  when I was early on in my career and we had, I was just talking a minute ago about LVI  and all this kind of stuff, and there was a lot of interest in occlusion and whatnot from the  80s into the early 2000s. Like it was all about occlusion and stuff. And you had these com -  peting philosophies out there, Dawson and Dickerson at LVI and the ICMO guys, the puls -  ing guys and CR guys that were doing CR kind of retreated. And there's all these kind of  different opposing thought processes, or so we thought.  [0:06:08]  And I was asked to give a lecture at our local dental society, and the president kind of  wanted to drum things up and see if we could get a lot of people there. And so he titled my  lecture CR versus CO, who's right, who's wrong, Dickerson versus Dawson. Yeah, that  was good. This guy was a good marketer, actually. And so we had like 70 plus people  09 /01/25   Page   of 2   16

SSC 2.0 - 305: Splints Simplified  show up at our local dental society meeting that normally got like 25. And there were peo -  ple that had kind of come loaded for bear because they wanted to either hear what was  going on in this or they wanted to fight, they wanted to argue. And so in preparation for  this, I had to kind of bone up on stuff because this is my hometown. This is not me lectur -  ing someplace with people that I'm never going to see again. This was my people that  were referring people to me or weren't referring people to me because of whatever reason  that they weren't referring people to me.  [0:07:02]  But this was a big deal. And there was a guy who was a Dawson guy, and I asked him,  could I borrow the videotapes, a long time ago, guys, the videotapes of the Dawson pro -  gram. And he allowed me to do that, and I got those. And I noticed that on the videotape,  you could probably Google this, like Dawson videotapes circa 1998 or something like that.  And on the cover was a sagittal cut drawing of a jaw joint. And similar to the joint videos  there, right? So the normal joint, that was what was on there. And the condyle was quite a  ways down, and there was a lot of space, and the disc was in the right spot. And I saw  that, and I immediately thought of something called the Gelb 4-7 position. And that is  something that you never hear about anymore, but back then it was a big deal.  [0:08:04]  And the Gelb, as in Harold Gelb, you may know Michael Gelb, who is Harold Gelb's son,  and Michael is mostly into sleep. But Harold was one of the original guys in the TMJ world.  And his 4-7 position, where that comes from is he would make a graph over the jaw joint,  and then he called the very top 1-2, and then he would come down 3-4-5-6-7-8 on this  condyle, this graph, and the condyle needed to mostly be in the 4-7 position, the body of  the condyle. So kind of down and forward in order to be in the right position. And that was  anatomical. So I actually took this cover.  [0:08:48]  I did the Gelb 4-7 grid on it and showed that the condyle on the Dawson video was in 4-7.  Now, at that time, everyone would have thought Gelb was anterior positioning. He was an  anterior positioning guy. And that Dawson was a CR guy. They were the same. They were  the same position. Around the same time, or a few years later, I mentioned I had just come  from speaking in Ontario, Canada, and I spoke at a meeting there in Ontario, Canada, be -  cause it was literally against the law for a dentist to use an anterior repositioning appli -  ance. Because that's what they called them. So they called them anterior repositioning ap -  pliances because they were taking people from a retruded position and positioning the  condyle anteriorly. But since nobody understood any of this anatomy, that sounded bad. If I  am anteriorly repositioning you, that kind of implies that I've taken you from maybe some -  place good to someplace bad.  [0:09:49]  On the other hand, if I am taking you from this bad retruded position into true centric rela -  tion, that sounds better, doesn't it? Right there, that is one of the secrets of my success, is  I refer to bringing the condyle into the right anatomical position as CR. And you know  what? A lot of your colleagues and your teachers and stuff like that, they really like that  09 /01/25   Page   of 3   16

SSC 2.0 - 305: Splints Simplified  term CR. It gives them a warm, fuzzy feeling inside. So the more you can say CR, the bet -  ter. But this really is CR. At least it was. They've now changed the definition to where the  disc isn't even part of the definition anymore. I hope that they repent from that and put it  back into an actual anatomical definition that makes sense. But as of 2025, the definition  of CR does not even include the disc, which makes no sense to anybody. But the true def -  inition of CR, going back to the very first original definition, go back to level one and watch  that again, the very first original definition by Dr. Ramsford was basically the anterior supe -  rior position of the condyle with the disc in the right spot. He says it can only be deter -  mined in joints without internal derangements. That's a way of saying the disc has to be in  the right spot. Internal derangement is reducing displacement, non-reducing displacement.  “CR” Splint   [0:11:16]  So use this term. And by the way, this will save your bacon. So if you are using an appli -  ance that brings the patient's jaw a little bit forward to get them on the disc, you're going to  have way less of a problem in your town if that's called a centric relation appliance. I gave  the patient a centric relation appliance versus if you put in your chart, I used an anterior  repositioning appliance, you're going to get in trouble. You just are. There's going to be  people in your community that's been passed down to them that that's bad. That's a bad  thing. So use CR anytime that we're going to be trying to make the disc go into a different  position. That's CR. Just to read this, a splint designed to bring the mandible into a more  physiological position. Typically used in most reducing disc displacement cases. If they  have a reducing disc displacement, so if their jaw is dislocated, I want to relocate them,  and so I would use a centric relation, a centric relocator splint, right? Centric relation.  “CO” Splint   [0:12:11]  CO splint, a splint that is designed to allow the patient's mandible to rest, quote unquote, in  a position that is the most comfortable for the joints and the muscles, typically used with  normal joints or degenerated joints. If we don't have a disc, then we can't bring them into a  better position, then mostly we won't. So CO, and the way that we will teach you to get to a  CO, is using more of a muscular approach or a phonetic approach. So going 60, 61, 62,  63. If you do that right there, that phonetic bite approach, you'll notice that that brings your  jaw forward. Now, why we do that is that's where we tend to hold our jaw. If you pay atten -  tion, even right now, unless your teeth are touching together like this because you were  clenching because you're so disturbed by what I'm talking about right now, if you're just  relaxed, you are probably a little down and forward. Our rest position is down and forward  from our maximum intercuspation. Maximum intercuspation is not where we hold our jaw.  Now, we also don't approximate our mandible right there.  09 /01/25   Page   of 4   16

SSC 2.0 - 305: Splints Simplified  [0:13:14]  So if you put your teeth together all the way and then open just a little, but kind of try to  hold your jaw back, hold your jaw into that position and just open a little, you'll see that that  feels kind of weird. At least it does for me anyway, and it for sure should for me, right? Be -  cause I've told you, I'm the retraction ortho guy, right? So I'm the premolar extraction, all  that stuff. So when I relax my jaw from here, this is kind of a retreated position. When I re -  lax, it's going to come down and forward. So I'm going to hold my jaw basically 60, 61, 62,  63 because that's where my jaw gets used. I don't spend a lot of time with my teeth to -  gether. So if I'm going to use my jaw for something, it's probably going to be speaking  more often than eating. I speak more than I eat. And so therefore, it's going to be there in  that 60, 61, 62. Okay? So make sure that makes sense.  [0:14:12]  CR in a nutshell means you say, hey, Jamison, I'm going to use a CR splint. Without you  even telling me, that means that we had a disc displacement that you can capture. CR.  Jamison, I'm going to use a CO appliance in this case. Without you saying it, that tells me  you believe the disc is in the right spot or you're not sure there is a disc anymore because  it's bone on bone. But in this case, it's not a disc that you're trying to do something with or  an anatomical position. It's just more of a muscular, let's go ahead and bring them into a  muscularly comfortable position. Now note that I put rest in quotations here because would  their jaw be at rest in a splint? No. When is a splint doing something? When their teeth are  touching it. So here's actually the trick. What we're doing with a splint, particularly during  the day, is we're changing their vertical of their freeway space. So your freeway space is  dictated muscularly by your occlusion. So we'll have a little bit of a space there of where  we rest our jaw. By filling that space, not completely, but by giving you two, three millime -  ters, four millimeters of acrylic or plastic or nylon or whatever you want to use, that  changes it, doesn't it?  [0:15:34]  So at first it's kind of like, dang, this is like in the way, but then your brain very quickly will  reprogram to this new occlusal program and it will change your rest because you don't  want to be on it all the time. So you will then relax off of it. But now instead of your freeway  space being three or four millimeters from your occlusion, now it's six, seven millimeters  from your occlusion because we have that space of the plastic. So we're able to change  the resting position of the jaw, which is one of the reasons we're able to wean people off is  we've changed their freeway space. We've changed their rest position so much that they  are less likely to go kind of from this more open, if you will, rest position to here. It's a big -  ger dramatic change for them. So their jaw becomes more comfortable in this rest position.  That is the secret sauce of splint therapy in general, is taking them from whatever they're  doing now and changing that rest position. It's really finding or capturing rest.  [0:16:40]  There's a newsletter article that are years ago. You can go and find in the newsletter article  archives and stuff, search for capturing rest. Read that article, goes all into detail on this  with Paselt's diagram and all that kind of stuff. And that's what we're really trying to do is  09 /01/25   Page   of 5   16

SSC 2.0 - 305: Splints Simplified  try to capture rest. Capture rest is a big part of splint therapy, and this goes right along with  1% occlusion. Continuing on splints, so CR and CO are jaw position.  Flat Plane vs Directive Splint   [0:17:05]  What about flat plane versus directive? So in our practice, we almost never use flat plane  appliances. Now, there are some people who do in Spencer Study Club. What we teach  you to do is a directive splint. So a flat plane is, as the name implies, it's flat and kind of  the jaw can go wherever. A directive splint is you're taking them to a certain spot. Why I'm  going to teach you to use a directive splint is because I don't want you surprised. Again,  this surprises me to find that most dentists don't ever question this, but, oh yeah, I use a  flat plane splint. Why do you use a flat plane splint? Why do you use a flat plane night  guard? Well, because it lets the jaw just kind of go wherever it wants to go. Do you want  the jaw to go wherever it wants to go? And then they'll kind of think about it and be like, I  guess I do. Well, what if you can't restore them? Okay, what if where their jaw wants to go  is over here like this? Super weird. Is that good? I mean, I guess it'd be, quote, good if  they felt better and stuff, but now what do you do with that? A directive splint, you're taking  the jaw where you think is good, and then we're going to see if their body can adapt to  that, if their body can tolerate that.  [0:18:20]  Their body's done okay tolerating or adapting to wherever it is now that their teeth occlude.  Yeah, you see this all the time. You see patients every day in your practice that have  weird, crazy occlusions, and they have no problems at all. They're eating everything they  want, and they're having a good time. Everything's cool. So why is that? Why is it that they  can do okay with their screwed up occlusion? Well, it's because they don't spend any time  there. They spend very little time in their screwed up occlusion, yes? A directive splint,  you're in charge, and directive is super important for CR, but also important for CO be -  cause we want that distinctive, this is my occlusion, to help reset that rest position. So  there could be an argument that you would give me for a flat plane. I can't think of one off  the top of my head, and that should tell you something. This is kind of all we do. So you  could give me that as an argument, and again, I have a couple friends that will use some  specialty splints, but unless you've got a lot of this under your belt, I would suggest direc -  tive. In other words, has occlusion. So you want a splint with occlusion, just like teeth,  okay?  Specialty Splints   [0:19:36]  Now what about the specialty splints? So we've got our anterior point stops, our NTIs, an -  terior deprogramming, cohesive program, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. Okay, so some of  09 /01/25   Page   of 6   16

SSC 2.0 - 305: Splints Simplified  the problems, so to speak, with these appliances, so in quotes, reduce muscle contraction.  Do they? How does something between the teeth reduce muscle contraction? Well, what  they do is they give a mechanical disadvantage is what they're doing. So if you bite on  your front teeth and your back teeth can't touch, so NTI stands for nociceptive trigeminal  inhibition, meaning you put pressure on your front teeth and a signal goes to your brain  that says, stop it.  [0:20:16]  So you will not, so you can do this right now. If you haven't done this before, bite on your  front teeth or bite on your back teeth first. Feel that temporalis swell up like crazy. Okay,  bite on your front teeth. You'll feel very little. How's that work? Well, because your brain is  smart enough to know that back teeth is where we're going to bring the power. We're going  to bring the force for chewing. Front teeth is just incising. That's biting off an apple. We  don't need all the force in the world to bite off a bite of an apple or to bite off something  else. Now, certain animals would have some tremendous force on those anterior teeth be -  cause they're grabbing something and can't let it move. We don't. So with our incisors,  when we incise something, we're not putting a massive force that we can bring with our  muscles of mastication, except when we sleep. So when we sleep, that nociception is ac -  tually turned off for most people. So people can put tremendous force on their teeth while  they sleep. Nevertheless, there will still be a mechanical disadvantage because you've  moved out the point of contact way forward, as forward as you can, and those muscles are  behind that forward point.  [0:21:30]  So you just can't quite get the mechanical advantage that you can when a place is more  posterior to bite on. So let's get kind of the bottom line here, do we use these type of ap -  pliances in our practice? Sometimes. And the sometimes might surprise you on when that  is. So these sometimes are, when we have a patient that we think is clenching their teeth a  lot, they've got some headaches, they've got anterior temporalis pain and things like that,  we've done everything else we can think of. It's not their airway. We know their airway is  protected, and this is often a case where they've got a sleep appliance and we've had  them back for a follow-up and we know everything's going good. Then in some cases, we  will add a little plastic on the front and make it so they only hit the front. When we do that,  it's not because necessarily that is the definitive treatment, it's that we don't know why  they're clenching their teeth at this point, so we're giving them something to give a me -  chanical disadvantage to that behavior. This would be similar to doing Botox after we've  ruled out sleep apnea.  [0:22:34]  It's not that the person has a Botox deficiency, it's that we want to give them something  that helps them, but we don't really understand. It's the helmet with the head banging  against the wall, right? So all of those things are treatments that don't really get to the eti -  ology, right? So don't think to yourself like, oh yeah, I use that because it makes them stop  grinding their teeth. No, it doesn't. They're still grinding their teeth, or it wouldn't do any -  thing. If it literally, you put it on the front teeth and the brain's like, oh, well screw this, I  09 /01/25   Page   of 7   16

SSC 2.0 - 305: Splints Simplified  guess I can't bite down anymore, well that would be awesome. No such thing exists. So  when you give that, it doesn't make them stop doing anything, it just makes it so it's harder  for them to hurt themselves. A night guard doesn't stop people from clenching and grinding  their teeth, it makes it so they can't hurt their teeth as much when they clench or grind their  teeth, okay?  [0:23:20]  Now other things here, all these things are in quotes, right? Allow the mandible to find a  comfortable position. That's why some people use a deprogrammer. Allow the mandible to  be manipulated into CR. Okay, cool. So I understand that this is why these have been  used over the years and why it's a deprogrammer and trying to get rid of the muscle line  gram so that we can manipulate the jaw. Understand the end goal of all of that. The end  goal of all that is a new program. So all of that was developed to take people to a new  program. It wasn't to keep them in their current program. So if you want to take people to a  new program, I.e. Crown all their teeth or orthodontically move their teeth, then alright,  then you could use some of these tools to find this better, theoretically, position.  [0:24:03]  But if you don't want to change their program, then why would you do this? And this is,  again, the thing that no one ever thinks about, is if you don't want their bite to change, and  let me say that a different way, if you don't want their program to change, maybe you  shouldn't use a deprogrammer. Does that make sense? I hope it does. So this is why we  are more directive in our splints. We want to direct them to where we want them to bite.  We're trying to not change the program whenever we can not change the program. And  hopefully that doesn't confuse with the CO appliances, the 60, 61, 62, because remember  that is rest. That's rest position. We're not trying to make their jaw stay there forever. We're  just trying to change, modify their rest position by changing that vertical. Their occlusion,  their habitual occlusion, their maximum air cuspation hasn't changed in that scenario.  Posterior Point, Pivot, Pre-Molar Appliances   [0:24:58]  All right, what about posterior point appliances, pivot appliances, premolar-only appli -  ances, stuff like that? So more quote things here. Reduce muscle contraction. No, they  don't. Allow the mandible to come into CR. Okay. Help to reduce a non-reducing dis-dis -  placement. Whatever. I don't think so. So there's no such thing as a pivot appliance be -  cause the masseter comes here, the temporalis is here, the coronoid process. Well, actu -  ally, geez, I got a picture kind of on the screen right here. So you see right in there is the  coronoid process and then the masseter is behind that. Okay. So here are all the teeth.  And this drawing has wisdom teeth. Okay. Most of your patients don't. So if we put a little  piece of plastic, a little bump at the premolar area, which would be called or on the molar  area, excuse me, on the molar area, usually first molar area. But let's take it all the way,  slam it back to the second molar area. What would pivot? Okay. A pivot implies that there's  09 /01/25   Page   of 8   16

SSC 2.0 - 305: Splints Simplified  a force. So people who are fans of this type of appliance will usually say, well, use a pivot.  And then that distracts the condyle. So when they bite down, it rotates their condyle down  on that pivot. But look at the mechanics there. So the pivot point is in front of the things  that are pulling. So if you pulled and you had a pivot here, what would that actually do to  the condyle? Okay. Think about that. I put a bump in front of here and then I pull here.  Wouldn't that bring my condyle up? Yeah, it would. So we don't tend to use those.  [0:26:38]  Now I have some good friends, and I won't name them on the video here, but these are  dentists that are really, really, really knowledgeable about TMJ problems, and they will use  an appliance, a pivot-style appliance, for certain of their patients, and I trust them to do  that. But you're not going to have me teach it to you and why that is, is because if I do  teach it to you, dentists in your community are going to be like, whoa, they used an appli -  ance that just had little bumps on each side, and that clearly has caused their teeth to su -  per erupt, and to intrude, and to all this other craziness. That's the other beauty of a direc -  tive appliance, is it has occlusion, like teeth, versus an NTI type of an appliance that  doesn't. And when you use stuff like that, if there's any bite change, dentists will make  claims of intrusion of teeth and or extrusion of teeth, both of which are wrong, both of  which are not true. But that's going to be up to you to defend, so why go there? So I tend  to use full coverage appliances with occlusion so that you don't ever have to fight that bat -  tle, and that's what I'll teach you.  [0:27:44]  Now if you get super duper advanced, then you can approach me someday and be like,  Jamison, what about a pivot appliance? What about these things that I know some of your  advanced members are using? Can you explain that to me? And I can, but to put you at  ease, in our practices, which are a couple of the biggest TMD sleep practices in the world,  we don't use. We use directive appliances like I've told you. So you can do very, very well  with that, and particularly with PRF therapy, I think we want to use our splint therapy, we  want to direct the jaw into what we think is the best anatomical position for this healing  process to occur, just so we're not surprised.  [0:28:24]  So that's kind of the bottom line, is I'd like you to choose a splint that doesn't surprise you.  Anything that is a deprogrammer, just ask yourself from now on, well, do I like the pro -  gram? What if there's a new program? Am I and the patient prepared to take them to the  new program? Or would we like to keep the current program? And as I refer to over and  over and over again, this goes back to 1% occlusion, 1% teeth together time, 99% teeth  apart time. This also applies to splint therapy. Do not think it doesn't. Now, even though  with a sleep appliance, let's say a sleep appliance here, because you might think, well, but  what about a sleep appliance, Jamison? Because then they're being held in this position  for six, seven, eight hours a day. That's not 1% occlusion. Well, you're right, because we're  holding their jaw.  [0:29:21]  09 /01/25   Page   of 9   16

SSC 2.0 - 305: Splints Simplified  But also, I don't want you to think that they are contracting their muscles to be against  those pads or be against the front thing or to have the appliances themselves together.  Unless the appliance is very thick, very tall, and gets rid of all of their freeway space, most  of your patients should be able to sleep with their teeth, plastic thing covering their teeth, a  little part. Okay, when I wear my appliance, and I wear an EMA style appliance usually, I'm  not touching the pads. Okay, my mouth, my teeth are apart. My lips are closed, teeth  apart. Lips together, teeth apart, right? So my lips are together, my teeth are apart. I'm not  clenching on that. But if you made those pads tall enough, I would have no choice. So  that's one of the reasons that I've taught you to have the vertical at the lowest vertical pos -  sible. We can always add more vertical if we want to, and then we'd have to think that  through. Why would more vertical work? Well, it's only going to work if we're kind of engag -  ing our muscles throughout the night. Do we want to engage our muscles throughout the  night?  [0:30:22]  Okay, think all those things through from a perspective of 1% occlusion or more occlusion.  When is that going to work? And all of this too is included in PRF now. So splint therapy as  of 2025 and beyond is supportive to regenerative TMD. Our main focus really should be  the regenerative procedures of PRF and exosomes and stem cell type treatments and  healing, just focused on healing. And the splint therapy is really crutches. So if you have  been around Spencer Study Club for a long time, this is all new. And you know that. We  didn't talk about PRF. We didn't talk about regenerative TMD. We didn't talk about things  like that originally because we weren't doing it. In the original recordings in level three  here, I did talk about prolotherapy, which is a proliferation therapy where we were injecting  like sugar water and even gave you instructions on how to mix that up. But if you've been  a member for the past few years, you've never heard me talk about that because we al -  most never used it. We found it to be very infrequently helpful. It was only helpful in really  young people that had an amazing ability to heal.  [0:31:46]  Whereas PRF, we're seeing this work in dang near everybody. And I'm sure in the coming  years that we'll be doing other things because this field is so exciting with work being done  in exosomes and stem cells and all sorts of things to improve the healing process natural -  ly. Splint therapy is crutches. And by the way, if that's the first time you're hearing that, this  can be a massive differentiator for you in your practice. Because I guarantee you for a long  time to come, most dentists will still think that the splint is the thing, that the plastic is the  thing. There's magic plastic purveyors and there always will be. You know better. You un -  derstand one percent occlusion, you understand healing. So really what we want to do is  we want to get that healing going. We want to give them crutches for a little bit. We can  then wean them off the crutches. And then at nighttime, we need to give them a crutch be -  cause we don't know what they're doing at night. That crutch might be a mandibular stabi -  lization appliance, I.e. A sleep appliance that isn't protruding their jaw forward. That night -  time appliance might be a sleep appliance because they have sleep apnea. We need to  protect their airway. That night appliance might just be an appliance that's there in case  09 /01/25   Page   of 10   16

SSC 2.0 - 305: Splints Simplified  they clench or grind their teeth to protect them. So they might need a crutch at night be -  cause all bets are off then. But during the day, they should be able to get to the point of  lips together, teeth apart. Crutches are what splint therapy is.  My Standard Protocol - CR Mandibular Day Splint   [0:33:15]  So let's talk about our standard protocol for reducing disc displacement or non-reducing  disc displacement. So we're going to use a mandibular day splint in centric relation. Now,  that might confuse you just a titch because we call centric relation with the disc in place,  right? So for a non-reducing disc displacement, we're not necessarily bringing the disc  back into place, at least not initially. But the goal here is we're going to bring the condyle  into a better anatomical physiological position. So that we're going to call our centric rela -  tion appliance. Now, as I mentioned just a little bit ago, the new definition of centric relation  ignores the disc anyway. So you could still use this term centric relation and be on firm  footing, either referencing the 1987 definition or the newer definitions or the newest defini -  tion, which ignores the disc.  [0:34:17]  So be ready for those. But again, you're almost never going to go wrong charting that I  used a centric relation appliance. But in our Spencer Study Club vernacular here, you say,  I used a centric relation appliance. That means if they have a reducing disc displacement,  you did your darndest to get them on the disc. If you believe or know that they have a non-  reducing disc displacement, it means that you're bringing the condyle a little down, you  know a little down the eminence, which by definition is typically down and forward. You're  bringing them into this better anatomical position for the condyle. And then doing this pos -  sibly as crutches for PRF, hoping that you've got some space there for the soft tissue to do  some healing, the hard tissue to do some healing. That's what you're going to be doing.  Maxillary Night Guard in CR   [0:35:05]  Okay. Maxillary night guard also in centric relation with this positioning ramp, what has  been referred to in the past as a farrah style night guard, might be rebranding that as a  airway friendly night guard. We'll cover this again, but remember, regardless of that ramp,  the only time that that is positioning them while they sleep is when? When they put their  teeth on it. So if somebody is a 1% occluder, that's only swallowing. So every time they  swallow when they sleep, which again, according to the studies is roughly 10 times per  hour, that they will gently bring their teeth together, possibly. That is when it would position  it. And that is when it works. Otherwise, it's not doing anything. If you really think that you  need to keep that jaw in a position, if you have a reducing disc displacement and you're or  you had someone recently locked and you just got them unlocked, you could make an ar -  09 /01/25   Page   of 11   16

SSC 2.0 - 305: Splints Simplified  gument for maybe I should use an appliance that's a sleep appliance to keep the jaw from  falling backwards. You know, something like the EMA with bands, really any sleep appli -  ance is going to keep the jaw from falling backwards. That's what they do. Okay. So stan -  dard protocol though, day splint night guard.  Adjustment to Appliance   [0:36:19]  Adjustments to the appliances after two weeks, four weeks, and then every three to four  weeks. This will change as you get more accomplished in this. So this is kind of how I  would have you start off. But pretty quick, go ahead and move to that first appointment be -  ing three to four weeks out and what I like to say to the patients is, hey, we're going to get  you back for your first follow-up in three to four weeks. But if there's anything bothering  you, if you're having any discomfort, having any problems at all, get back in here. Give us  a call. We'll get you back in here and take care of that because the last thing I want to do  is have you come back in a month and then say, hey, I wasn't able to wear the appliance at  all because of this comfort issue. That's the exact same dialogue you may remember in  level two talking about oral appliance therapy. The only difference is with oral appliance  therapy for sleep apnea, we tell them to give themselves a few weeks to get used to wear -  ing it at all, get to wearing it through the night, give themselves a couple weeks. TMD, we  don't do that. We don't really give them the option of like, hey, this is going to take a while  to get used to or whatever. It's like, no, this is what you're doing. This is what you're wear -  ing now. And that would be even more important if you're doing PRF. Okay, you don't give  someone crutches and say, yeah, learn how to use these over the next couple weeks. You  say, hey, these are crutches. We just did this procedure. You need to use the crutches  right now. So that's the appliance or adjustments to the appliances. So again, adjustments,  make that first appointment about two weeks, and then after that, four weeks, and then  three to four weeks are going to be basically monthly, are going to be your follow-up ap -  pointments.  Typical Patient is in Therapy   [0:37:58]  Typical patient is in treatment for four to six months. This is getting faster with PRF, so the  quicker you can learn how to do PRF, the faster you're going to get people better, and the  faster you're going to be able to wean them off of their splint. We know this now from hun -  dreds and hundreds of cases that we've treated with PRF as of 2025. Again, by the time  you're watching this, we could have treated what we have treated over a thousand patients  at this point between our Boise and our Salt Lake practice. And then if you combine the  efforts of everyone in Spencer Study Club that's doing this, it's multiple thousand people  09 /01/25   Page   of 12   16

SSC 2.0 - 305: Splints Simplified  that have been through this. All of us are seeing the same thing. People get better faster.  We're able to wean them off their splint faster.  Day Splint is Worn to Eat   [0:38:38]  Okay, day splint is warned to eat if the patient has pain when they eat or phase two is  planned. Okay, the first one should be fairly obvious, although I know it's not common to  have people eat with their splint in, although it should be intuitively obvious that if their  problem is it hurts when I eat, if it hurts when you play tennis, your tennis elbow, maybe  you need a brace on your elbow when you play tennis. You know, almost everything else  in life, if it hurt when we did it, we would have something to use when we did that thing or  we'd have to rehabilitate to get ourselves back to doing that thing. That has been done  with TMJ problems in the past is the kind of classic, well, don't chew gum and soft diet and  stuff like that. That's appropriate if it's an acute problem. In this scenario though, this is  someone who's been dealing with this for a long time and they have pain when they chew.  Have them eat with the appliance in.  [0:39:35]  Now, I'll cover this in a few slides here, but we don't really need to talk to them about what  they should or shouldn't eat. All we have to do is say, eat with your splint in and then they  will figure out pretty quick that they can't eat anything with their splint in. They can only eat  very soft foods at the beginning and then eventually they get really good at eating with  their splint in. They're eating steak with their splint in and then they don't need to wear their  splint anymore. The crutches analogy there, if you were ever on crutches, I knock on  wood, never had to be on crutches, but I had friends that were and at the beginning,  they're kind of like tripping and falling and it's kind of really tough on them and stuff. And  then by the end, when they're about to not need to be on crutches anymore, they could go  out and run the high hurdles with their crutches. They got so good at it, right? And then  they don't need them anymore. That's the splints or crutches, right? So we have them use  them and they will get used to it. They will modify their diet at first. Again, on the crutches,  they would take it a little slower moving around. Eventually, their diet is going to go back  more to normal and then we wean them off, right? Then they don't need it anymore.  [0:40:42]  Oh, and sorry, on the phase two, that is also, again, I hope intuitively obvious, even though  I know you've never been taught that before. If you are planning on, we're changing their  bite. So this person has a TMJ problem, but they didn't even know they had a TMJ prob -  lem. They just knew that they didn't like their smile. They just knew they had crooked teeth.  And then you figured out that they have popping and clicking and when you ask them  questions like, oh yeah, as a matter of fact, I do have headaches. And oh yeah, as a mat -  ter of fact, it does hurt me to eat a steak at a restaurant. And so I don't usually choose  chewy foods like that, okay? That's going to happen. So if that's the case, then yeah,  09 /01/25   Page   of 13   16

SSC 2.0 - 305: Splints Simplified  they're eating with the appliance in because we're headed towards, this is where your  teeth are going to live. We're going to give you a new bite here to this spot. It'd be nice for  them to try that new spot and make sure that they tolerate it. I do not, cannot wrap my  brain around the schools of thought out there that will restore people to a brand new oc -  clusion, sometimes with full crowns, and never try it out. Okay, I think that is a recipe for  disaster. So you've got the ability to try it out. Maybe sometimes you can't, you know, with  an all-on-four case or something like that, it's harder to do that. The dentures to then all-  on-four or all-on-however-many implants, it's not quite the same. But if this person has  teeth, which these are going to be the people we're going to treat, you got the option, so  you might as well use that.  Wean Off if no Phase II - Recap   [0:42:12]  Wean off the appliance if no phase two is planned. So if we're not headed to, if our goal is  to not change their bite, then we're going to wean them off, okay? So that should be pretty  clear. If you don't mind, let me just kind of repeat it here. Standard protocol, reducing dis -  placement or non-reducing displacement. We're using a centric relation day splint, a cen -  tric relation night guard. They're the exact same position, just one's on the bottom during  the day, so it's less obnoxious. One's on the upper during the night, has a little ramp thingy  on it so that every time they swallow, it's doing something. When they're not swallowing,  it's not doing anything. If you think that you need to hold their jaw from falling backwards,  you're going to use a sleep appliance instead. We're going to get them back for their first  follow-up when you're kind of a beginner, two weeks, then about basically monthly. You're  going to have them be in treatment for typically four to six months, maybe starting the  weaning process around four months for most people. Again, if you're doing PRF, this is all  going to make it quicker. Day splints worn to eat if they have pain when they eat or you're  planning phase two. We wean off if you're not planning phase two.  Night Guard is Worn FOREVER!   [0:43:24]  All right, night guard forever. And if you're using a sleep appliance as the night guard, then  the sleep appliance forever. Something in there forever. And I've mentioned this before,  but my mentor was a phase two guy, crown the teeth, stuff like that. And as I mentioned,  everyone who came back having problems that he had treated, stopped using their night  guard. Like literally everyone. That every time is like, hey, are you wearing your night  guard? Oh yeah, man, I lost that or it broke or whatever. And we would give him a new  night guard and actually they would do great. Again, I think that's maybe because he was  treating their airway just accidentally by doing crowns and stuff.  09 /01/25   Page   of 14   16

SSC 2.0 - 305: Splints Simplified  My Standard Protocol - Myofascial Pain   [ 0:44:07]  Okay, now my standard protocol for myalgia or myofascial pain, and there's no popping or  clicking. So the last protocol there, if they have popping or clicking, that's what you're do -  ing. So now we have someone, we think that the disc is in the right spot. Okay, we haven't  taken an MRI, we don't know 100% for sure, but everything kind of points to normal disco  relationship.  Mandibular Day Splint - Maxillary Night Guard in “CO”   [0:44:35]  So in this case, we're going to use a mandibular day splint in centric occlusion, and this is  going to be our 60-61-62, our phonetic bite is how we're going to find this. We're going to  use a maxillary night guard also in this exact same position, centric occlusion, with the little  positioning ramp. Once again, if you thought it was important that their jaw not fall back,  maybe because you believe there's an airway issue, but you don't know yet, and you  haven't had a sleep study yet, maybe you would even use a sleep appliance instead of a  ferrous down night guard, because the ferrous down night guard, once again, only works  when their teeth are together.  Adjustments - Therapy for 4 to 6 months   [0:45:07]  Adjustments to the appliance, you're going to set up that first appointment in two weeks,  then basically every month. We're going to typically have the patient in treatment for four  to six months. If you're doing PRF, which you can do for muscle problems too, it's not just  joint arthritis, it's muscle problems too, it's going to be faster, much faster as a matter of  fact. Day splint worn to eat if the patient has pain when they eat, or you're planning phase  two. So people with muscle problems could have phase two as well. Maybe they, again,  are just coming in because they want their teeth straight, maybe because they want a new  smile. They didn't know that they had a problem until you started palpating around, and  they're like, oh my gosh, that hurts. They then start talking about the headaches, stuff like  that.  Wean off - Night Guard is Worn FOREVER!   [0:45:48]  Wean off if no phase two is planned. Night guard is worn forever. Do you notice that these  are exactly the same? So the protocols for a reducing disc displacement or non-reducing  displacement, an internal derangement, and the protocol for no internal derangement is  09 /01/25   Page   of 15   16

SSC 2.0 - 305: Splints Simplified  the same. It's just the splint is different in that it's our intention, really. I mean, you could  even have these where it's literally the same spot. It's possible that this phonetic 60, 61,  62, 63, that's exactly where you need to be to have the disc in the right spot, possibly. So  could you call all of the splints a centric occlusion appliance or something like that? Sure.  Just in our vernacular, if I asked you, well, what kind of splint did you use? And you said  centric relation, then that means, that tells me that, well, that means they had a disc dis -  placement, or you think that they're off the disc. We're thinking internal derangement.  Whereas if you say, well, I did a centric occlusion appliance, that means you think there is  no internal derangement, that it's more a muscle case. Okay? So nothing else is different.  These are the same.  [0:47:01]  The one case is not necessarily easier than the other. It would seem that maybe a muscle  problem would be easier to deal with in an internal arrangement. Definitely not the case,  actually. The easiest ones, for sure, are popping and clicking with pain. Those are by far  the easiest, because you get them back on the disc, and they tend to be better. Imagine,  again, if my shoulder was dislocated, I would probably have muscle pain all around those  muscles that stabilize my shoulder, and if it got relocated, probably that muscle pain would  go away, wouldn't it? So that, believe it or not, I know that seems scary, because you're  like, whoa, I just barely learned what that popping or clicking is. Now that's going to be my  easiest case? Yeah, it is. If you can get them on the disc, can't always, but if you can get  them on the disc, the muscle pain and the headaches and the jaw pain and all that stuff  usually gets better really, really fast. Throw PRF into the mix, it's going to get better twice  as fast.  [0:48:00]  All right, so my standard protocol, myalgia, myofascial pain with internal derangement. So I  already kind of gave you the heads up on this one, but I'll fill on this slide really quick be -  cause you're going to see that this is exactly the same as popping and clicking. So the re -  ducing displacement, non-reducing, so internal derangement, centric relation. Internal de -  rangement, centric relation. No internal derangement, centric occlusion. No internal de -  rangement, centric occlusion. Everything else remains the same.  [outro music]  09 /01/25   Page   of 16   16

