SSC 2.0 - 306: CR & CO  SSC 2.0   Level 3  306: CR & CO  [intro music]  Day Splint and Night Guard Fabrication   [0:00:12]  All right, so how do we make these things? And I'm going to go through the old school  method because I think that it is much easier for you to understand what we're doing if I  show you this way. And by the way, so as of 2025, as I'm recording this, this is how we're  making our appliances. We print the models. We 3D print the models because that's more  convenient and easier and less messy than pouring them up in stone. We still have stone.  But we're using thermoforms. And I'll show you how we do that. But you might do that too.  Thermoform machine is like 3,500 bucks maybe. The one you see here on the screen, the  Erkaform, you get those from Glidewell. It's a German-made machine. These things will  last you for decades probably. It's just really high-quality stuff. And it has, as you see here,  it's got a, we call this the, or they call it the Occluform. So it's an articulator that allows you  to articulate those models there to put them anywhere you want. And then you're going to  tap down into the hot thermoplastic material to tap the bite in.  [0:01:22]  So super-duper convenient. Very easy to do. And you don't have to buy a $20,000 printer,  although we have the $20,000 printer, don't we, because we're printing the models. So  more than likely, by the time you're watching this, we will be printing appliances. And we  won't do it this way anymore. But you still need to understand the why and the what and  the how. Because when you're printing, you're going to have to design and you're going to  have to take the bite record just right, just like you do here. So I hope that going through  this, even 10 years from now when people are watching this, I hope that going through this  traditional way of making it helps you understand what the goal is. And we don't lose that.  You're going to print, but you really need to understand these principles in order to print the  appliance accurately.  What Do We Need?   [0:02:17]  All right. So what do we need? Day splint, night guard fabrication, stuff like that. So diag -  nosis, what type of splint do we need? Are we doing CR? Are we doing CO? We need our  bite registration in that position. Then the lab fabrication or printing and then we're going to  fit with this to make sure that everything's cool in the patient's mouth. The nice thing about  09 /01/25   Page   of 1   7

SSC 2.0 - 306: CR & CO  printing or thermoforming is the materials that we have, you can bond acrylic to it. Or with  printing, frankly, if it's off, you might consider doing another one. You might consider  reprinting because it doesn't cost that much to reprint. But if you wanted to add acrylic to  get rid of a little bit of a discrepancy or something like that, you typically can with most  printing acrylics because acrylic standard powder liquid acrylic will bond to them.  Bite Registration for Centric Relation Splint   [0:03:12]  Bite registration for a centric relation splint is going to be all about that joint position. I will  do a demo and put it in here of how we do that in our practice. And I'll show you just kind  of traditional blue mousse method as well as scanning. Again, you're probably going to be  scanning, but you may not. The Spencer Study Club is worldwide, and not everyone's go -  ing to have a scanner. So we're going to show you how to do it traditionally, how to do it  scanning. And just the real key there is where the jaw is and where that splint is going to,  quote, hold the jaw. Remember, it only holds the jaw when the teeth are touching. So  whenever the person bites down, where that is going to be.  The Modified Gelb Technique   [0:03:50]  I'm going to go through what I call the modified Gelb technique, and this was handed down  to me by my mentor forever and a day ago. And this is what he kind of created. So Dr.  Gelb would, excuse me, Harold Gelb, that I was talking about earlier, the 4/7 Gelb position  and stuff like that. And then Michael Gelb, who's known in the dental sleep medicine world,  that's his dad, was Harold Gelb. He came up with how to do this, and he was using tran -  scranial X-rays and kind of figuring out that Gelb 4-7 position and stuff like that. My mentor  came up with a different way to do it that's easier. And so I'll take you through this so you  kind of see the stepwise approach of how we figure this out, including a fabrication of a  wax bite. Now, this is something that we no longer do in our office, but we did it for a long  time. And this might be something that you consider doing at first and I'll give you the pro  of it is that you're testing the position with the patient right then, and it can be pretty power -  ful. Okay, so I'm going to, again, take you through this so you kind of see the entire  thought process and tell you in advance, though, that we don't do this in our practice any -  more. We can just do this very simply, which I'll show you too. But you might consider ac -  tually doing this for your first 10 or 20 cases so that you really kind of go through every  step and you're like, okay, I totally get this. I understand what I'm doing here.  Galetti Articulator   [0:05:24]  09 /01/25   Page   of 2   7

SSC 2.0 - 306: CR & CO  So here we have what's called a Galetti articulator. It's a plasterless articulator. You can  probably find one of these on eBay, and that's probably the only place you can find it. Well,  actually, I think that's not true. I think Galetti still makes these. If you get a true Galetti, Ital -  ian-made Galetti articulator, it will almost assuredly last you your entire career. They're  $300, $400, $500, something like that, but they will last forever. So, Galetti articulator,  hand-articulated models in this case, or you could have the bite registration to know where  they are and you tighten it all up. So it's got all these screws and stuff on it, and you tight -  en everything up in the patient's occlusion, and then we have some magic happen here.  [0:06:09]  So this is this patient's occlusion, and then check out up in here in the condylar component  of this, we put a shim in there, which is a cotton tip applicator. So I put a cotton tip applica -  tor in there and bust it off, and what that's going to do is it's going to move, you see that  this bar here is associated with this up here, so we are moving the maxillary component up  and back along this slope a little bit, okay? Now that is equivalent, since the maxilla didn't  go anywhere, that is equivalent to taking the mandible down and forward a little bit, okay?  So we bust off that stick, we're just putting a shim in there, and that's, you know, millime -  ter-ish, millimeter and a half, down and forward, and that's where the vast majority of pa -  tients, this is going to work out for them. So now you see that our occlusion, we have this  posterior open bite here, we've brought them forward a little bit by moving the upper jaw  back with this articulator, we've brought the lower jaw effectively down.  Wax Bite   [0:07:11]  Now we're going to make a wax bite, and you can do this with flame, you can actually just  warm up the pink base plate wax with hot water, you can do whatever, but you're just go -  ing to heat it up, roll it up like a hot dog, you're then going to push it around on the teeth,  close the articulator into the wax, getting the indentations in there, and then you're going to  trim it up with a knife, getting rid of all of the excess wax. So I'm making a splint out of wax.  And that's it. Looks nice, right? So now we have a wax bite. Now is this real? Is this the  real bite for the patient? Well, it could be, but unlikely, because I made this, I just made this  up. I put cotton tip applicators back in the joint component of the articulator and broke it off.  I just put a shim in there. So yeah, it could be the bite, but it's most likely not the bite. So I  can't just take this and make a splint now in that position.  [0:08:20]  I need to take this to the mouth and then have the patient gently tap into it, and they're go -  ing to morph that wax and make it actually their bite. But it's going to guide them into this  more forward position. There is massive pro number one, is there will be something to help  guide the patient's jaw where we want it to be. Just this past weekend, I was teaching up  in Canada, and when I went into the crowd to be like, hey, who's got a nice loud pop and  click and stuff like that? The woman that raised her hand, I was, oh, actually, you know  09 /01/25   Page   of 3   7

SSC 2.0 - 306: CR & CO  what? I take that back. It was in my hands-on course, and this was a dentist. So the other  was a hygienist. Actually, she did pretty good with her jaw. I was with a dentist, and we  were doing the same thing because this dentist was having a hard time wrapping around  the reducing displacement, and she had one in her own head, and she really couldn't fig -  ure it out. And I palpated, and I'm like, can you feel that? Kind of went through my whole  thing, and then I'm like, all right, bite down on your front teeth like this.  [0:09:26]  And I swear to you, it took like six times for me to be like, no, no, no, here, here, here. And  I was literally frustrated. I don't get frustrated that easily, and I made a joke to the rest of  the dentist there. I'm like, it blows my mind how hard it is to get a dentist, for crying out  loud, to bite in the right spot. And she was biting on her back teeth, which is a little weird.  Most patients want to bite on their front teeth, right? But she just kept biting on her back  teeth. I'm like, no, front teeth. And finally, I got her to bring her jaw into the right spot and  then open and close, open and close to that spot over and over again. If I would have had  this wax bite, I could have just gently guided her jaw into feeling those indentations, and  then she would have went into the right spot. All right, so that's a massive advantage of the  wax bite is you're guiding them into something. You can see it. They can feel it. They can  rest their jaw there, and that's going to help you tremendously figuring out, okay, is that  right or not?  Wax Bite Try-In   [0:10:26]  Okay, so here we go. We got to take this now to the mouth because this is not a real bite  registration yet. This is just a pretend bite registration, so to speak. Now we're going to  take it and make it real. So what we're doing here with a centric relation appliance is we  have a patient that is off the disc, so they have a reducing displacement, reducing mean -  ing that when they come forward, it reduces. It goes back into normal position. So our wax  bite, we're taking them from here to here. Well, how will we know we've taken them from  here to here? What will be different? Once they open, pop, and then they close down into  the wax, what should they be able to do? Open again with what? No clicking, right? So we  want them to be able to open and close, open and close into that wax bite without clicking  if they're in the right spot. So it's important that they open and close into the wax without  the click anymore, and this is pro number two, is the patient's going to recognize, they're  going to be like, oh my gosh, I can't tell you how many patients, when we did this all the  time, and I probably did this on every patient for a decade, probably.  [0:11:40]  Again, my mentor did it all the time, and so that's what I was taught to do, and I'll bet you  10 years I did this. And then it got a little bit, when you get to a certain volume of patients,  it's just too much. It's too much to do to get all this stuff in advance and make these things  and stuff like that, and I figured out how I could do it without it, which I'll teach you too. But  09 /01/25   Page   of 4   7

SSC 2.0 - 306: CR & CO  once again, maybe the first dozen, two dozen, three dozen patients you have, go through  this. Go through this old school, old-timey method so that you learn the principles behind it.  Okay, so the patient's going to think it's cool, though, because you're going to be able to  put this magic thing in their mouth, and all of a sudden they're like, oh my gosh. Okay, and  again, actually, if you get really good with the printing stuff, you could do this before they  even come in.   You could do the same thing where you just kind of, on the digital articula -  tor, like, hey, just come down and forward a little bit here, let's make something, maybe  make it in a softer acrylic, so like kind of the more squishy night guard type of materials  that they make, and that could be something that they can close on and stuff like that.  Now, will it be a bite registration, though? No, it won't. So you would have to do something.  You'd have to, like, flow in some blue mousse, or you'd have to do something in order to  make that real. Wax can deform, obviously, and it's going to become real after we put it in  the patient's mouth.  [0:12:59]  All right, so here's our patient. Little inflamed gums and stuff there, right? So you see her  midline and stuff. That should look exactly like it did with the articulator, the plasterless ar -  ticulator there. Note that she's got mamelons. You know, this is not our massy of a grinder  patient, a young lady here. And there she is on that side, and there she is on the other  side. So this looks exactly like it did on the plasterless articulator there. Here is the wax  bite again. We've just kept her midline, so those marks on the lower anteriors there are to  remind me of where the midline was originally and also where the overbite was. So she's  opened up. Now, the opening is dictated by the overbite. So if she's tight, which she was, a  tight overbite, when you come forward a little bit, by necessity you have to open up that  jaw because the front teeth are banging into each other, right? So that's why she kind of  looks open quite a ways.  [0:14:07]  On the other hand, the other thing that you're looking for as you go through this is, is this  restorable? So right from this minute, we're looking at this with this wax bite and we're like,  okay, if this person did great in therapy and wasn't able to wean off, could we do this?  Could we crown her teeth and it'd be okay there? Or in this case with this young lady,  could we do orthodontics and kind of pull some things together and everything would be  okay? I would say yeah. I would say yeah. I mean, you'd maybe close her down another  millimeter maybe, but you would then have a pretty decent overbite and your curve of  speed would be good and everything would actually look really nice. If you just kind of  filled in teeth right there and maybe made, again, extruded some of those teeth that come  into position, you would agree with me that that's doable. This is not some crazy position  that there's no way we could do that restoratively or orthodontically.  Wax Bite to the Mouth   [0:15:05]  09 /01/25   Page   of 5   7

SSC 2.0 - 306: CR & CO  All right, let's take the wax bite now to the mouth. And there she blows. So now when you  do this, you can't have them bite down really hard because they'll just squash the wax right  out and they'll be right back to their normal inclusion. It's not going to work. So you have  them gently tap, tap, tap. Now since she had a reducing displacement, we palpate, open,  and then guide her in, watch her teeth go into little grooves that'll help them find it. More of  that edge to edge, kind of not quite edge to edge, but in that position that we guessed  would work. And by the way, this guess came from years and years and years of doing this  with x-rays. So my mentor would check this bite position with a transcranial x-ray and  show that the condyle was where he wanted it to be and again, we don't do that anymore  because we would have to put them in a cone beam CT and that makes no sense to me to  irradiate them just to see that the condyle went where I'm confident it went.  [0:16:02]  But that's where it came from. So it's a bit of a guess, but then it was a guess that was  proven over years of doing this on many, many, many, many people. So you can kind of  take this to the bank that like this works the vast majority of the time. So we gently tap into  the wax, gently tap into the wax. And then again, this is going to look just like it did on the  articulator. But now we have, at this point, we have a real bite registration. So the teeth  have kind of gone into it and deformed the wax a little bit. And now we have an actual bite  registration. So now we can take this bite. And again, the patient experienced, oh my  gosh, I don't click with that in my mouth. That's so amazing. And you know, you might have  them just kind of gently tap on it. I can't tell you how many patients over the years were  like, hey, can I take this home with me? Oh my gosh, this feels so good, right? Because it's  their jaw's in the right place for the first time in maybe years. And so they get really excited  about it. And then they know that, okay, that's what this splint thing is going to do. That's  what these crutches are going to do. They're going to bring me into this right spot.  Bite Registration For A “Centric Occlusion Splint”   [0:17:05]  Now let me show you how to take a bite registration for a centric occlusion splint. Now  quotes there, air quotes, because we're not, with centric occlusion, remember, we're not  actively trying to change disc condyle position. So, as a reminder, we are going to use cen -  tric occlusion splint. This is our terminology. This is what we use in Spencer Study Club as  well as what I'd encourage you to put in your chart notes. Because if they're ever evaluat -  ed by one of your peers, using terms like centric relation, centric occlusion is frankly going  to impress them. They're going to actually put their own definition of what those terms  mean, but they're always going to think that it's cool basically, rather than you putting ante -  rior repositioning stuff like that. That's just the way it goes. So, centric occlusion to Spencer  Study Club members means I'm not actively trying to put the disc condyle relationship into  a different position. I am treating someone that I believe either the disc is in the right place  or I'm pretty confident the disc is out of place and has been for a really long time, so I'm  09 /01/25   Page   of 6   7

SSC 2.0 - 306: CR & CO  not really focused on trying to modify that. I'm going to put them into a comfortable posi -  tion, a rest position. Now, no such thing as rest and occlusion, can't put those two words  together, but what we're doing is we're putting the occlusal position close to the rest posi -  tion, obviously the rest position being with the teeth apart. So, what we're going to do here  is basically a phonetic bite, meaning 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, that sibilant spot is where we're  going to take our bite registration. That is going to be our bite for centric occlusion.  [For a step-by-step video on how to take the registrations, please go to your “how-to  videos” in your main library.]  [outro music]  09 /01/25   Page   of 7   7

