SSC 2.0 - 307: Phase One Therapy  SSC 2.0   Level 3  307: Phase One Therapy  [intro music]  “CR” and “CO” Day Splint   [0:00:12]  So now you've seen how to take a CO bite, how to take a CR bite using the traditional wax  bite method, and then also how you would do that without doing the wax bite method. And  so here, let me show you a picture of a CR day splint. So here you go. Here's the CR day  splint. And now watch, here's a CO day splint. Okay. Actually, let me back up a slide.  Here's the CR day splint. And here's the CO day splint. Okay. You didn't see any differ -  ence, did you? Well, and neither would I know if I just looked at an appliance and even  looked at that articulated with the models like we have here on the screen, I wouldn't know  if that was CR or CO. You'd have to tell me. Because again, CR means you are actively  trying to modify, modulate that condyle disc relationship. CO means you aren't. That is the  only way I would know a difference. Now note on these appliances here that the anterior is  trimmed off. That does a couple of different things. It makes it easier for the person to  speak. It's a little bit less obnoxious, doesn't push their lip out.  [0:01:24]  Now, I don't necessarily recommend that you do that. This is a little bit more for someone  who has established themselves in their community. I about said more advanced, but I  don't mean it that way. Like you need advanced skills to do this. What you do need is a  good reputation. Because when you do anything like this, you have to recognize that if a  dentist looks at an appliance that doesn't cover all the teeth, they are then going to say  that that allowed for super eruption of the teeth. That's just the way we were trained and  that's the way we thought. Now again, if I asked that dentist or orthodontist or whoever that  accused you or your splint, so to speak, of allowing the anteriors to super erupt, what hap -  pens in these cases? It's similar to a sleep apnea appliance case, right? So you have a  sleep apnea appliance and the person develops a posterior open bite, right? Because the  jaw has come into a different position, into a more anterior position and because of our  overbite, the anteriors are kind of in the way there, the back teeth are apart. You will have  someone more than likely in your career look at that bite relationship and then explain to  the patient or tell the patient to tell you that that appliance intruded all their posterior teeth  or that appliance super erupted their front teeth.  [0:02:47]  They never thinking that, well, what if I just took models of the teeth, I wonder if they still  went together. Okay, the teeth have not gone anywhere. And what's fascinating to me is  the same person that would blame the appliance therapy on this super eruption or intru -  09 /01/25   Page   of 1   17

SSC 2.0 - 307: Phase One Therapy  sion. If you said, I'm just curious, doctor, how much time do you think people spend with  their teeth together or just ask another way, how much time should people spend with their  teeth together during say a 24 hour period, during a day? Like how much time should peo -  ple really spend with their teeth together? I guarantee you that dentist is going to say, oh,  very little. And then you could even follow that up with, and just curious about how much  time at nighttime would you say that your average person should spend with their teeth to -  gether? And they're probably going to say, oh, I don't know, like maybe a few minutes. And  then you've kind of painted them in a corner and say, so you're telling me that this appli -  ance, because the teeth weren't able to touch that few minutes during the night, allowed  for super eruption, even though they only wore this appliance during the night.  [0:03:54]  So this is one of the reasons that I highly recommend that you do a lower day splint and  an upper night guard. And it is darned rare in our practice that we use only a lower day  splint. And if we only used a lower day splint, we would not trim off the anterior as is shown  here. So we would only do that if we're using an upper night guard, which again, probably  95% of the time, we're going to use a separate upper sleep appliance because well, ex -  cuse me, an upper appliance that they wear when they sleep is what I mean by that. And  you could use a sleep appliance, but we're going to use a different appliance at nighttime.  Now, how this helps us avoid any accusations of tooth movement is you see here, we've  got our lower splint and yeah, that's trimmed off to make it easier for them to use and to  talk with and everything else. But then the upper appliance, those lower anteriors are go -  ing to go right into that. So as long as we have full occlusion, which is how we make the  appliances with full occlusion all the way around, and then we've got that little ramp there,  which by the way, indexes the lower anteriors even better because it's indexed not only  against the upper, the lingual surfaces of the upper incisors, but we've got this ramp.  [0:05:14]  So we've got an indexing on the facial and lingual of the lower incisors. There's no ques -  tion that the teeth have not gone anywhere when the person has this upper full coverage  and this lower. And this is even my recommendation if you're using an NTI style appliance  is I like you to have full coverage on the upper. Now, obviously only the front teeth are go -  ing to hit the ramp that you put on there or the plane that you hit on there, but at least no  one can say that those teeth moved if you've got full coverage on the upper. And if I were  you, I would potentially make a lower appliance that's just a thin bleaching tray type of ap -  pliance, but a hard material, that goes on the bottom that you can again use to see, see,  this fits. And this was all pre-treatment.  [0:06:06]  Think through this stuff. Again, once you've done hundreds of cases and established your  reputation, then you don't need to worry quite as much about this stuff. But when you're  just getting started, you do. Because again, you're going to treat some people that you're  not their dentist and this is really critical if you are doing sleep and TMD as part of your  general dental practice. As I've mentioned to you in level two, my dental exam for a sleep  apnea patient is, when did you see your dentist last? Oh, you don't have a dentist? Well,  09 /01/25   Page   of 2   17

SSC 2.0 - 307: Phase One Therapy  let's get you to a dentist. That's my dental exam. And I'm having their dentist run every -  thing and make sure that they are sound dentally. And then if there's any kind of side ef -  fects, then we're working together on this.  [0:06:55]  You, on the other hand, you've got to do the world's greatest dental exam because if that  patient has another dentist, then you could be blamed for progression of their periodontal  disease or their crown coming off or whatever, right? So you want to make sure you've  done a really, really good job of documenting everything in these cases. So think that  through and be careful with that because there's a lot of people out there that are massive  advocates for using an anterior point stop appliance or stuff like that. And I get it. I under -  stand where they're coming from and the thought process behind that. But just be aware  that when you do stuff like that, there will be someone inevitably that would then say, oh  yeah, this bite change is due to super eruption of the second molars or whatever. This is  why we have great records.  Fitting The Splint(s)   [0:07:44]  All right, now let's just get to fitting of the splints. It's not rocket science here. And this is  actually similar to how we do our sleep appliances. It's the same thing. So we adjust for  comfort, of course, and then we adjust to hit on both sides, just like the sleep appliance,  right? So we don't say things like, does that hit evenly? Because if you say, does that hit  evenly, then you might be there three hours later with the patient wondering if it's even or  not. And remember from level one, the changes in our bite, and I also cover this in level  two, let me do it again, repetition's the mother of skill here. Tap your teeth together like  that. Tap your teeth together looking straight up. You hear the difference there? I bet you  do. Okay, tap your teeth looking down. Three different bites, right? Okay, tap your teeth  gently looking to the side, to the other side.  [0:08:41]  Okay. All of those are different for almost everyone. If you're one of the outliers that your  bite's not different when you do those different head postures, you're an outlier, okay? So  your average person, that's going to be different. And the reason I point that out again at  this point is if they're sitting in your dental chair here and you're doing this kind of appli -  ance on them and stuff, that is different. And in this picture that we grabbed, this woman  has got her head against that headrest for sure, and that is going to be different than if her  head is not on a headrest. And how often is she going to be wearing her appliance sitting  in a dental chair with her head on a headrest? Never. So we don't want to really make a  big deal about the bite in our weird environment of a dental chair. Her legs are probably  up. Again, she's never going to be in this posture in her life other than in your dental chair.  So yeah, the appliance will be perfectly adjusted in the dental chair and then nowhere  else. So that's not your goal.   So hitting on both sides is the phrase. And then remember to  09 /01/25   Page   of 3   17

SSC 2.0 - 307: Phase One Therapy  look and use your articulating paper and kind of pull your articulating paper a little bit and  make sure they actually are hitting on both sides. We don't want them just take it other  words, I'd hit on both sides. Yeah. And then you don't look. And then later down the road,  you do look and they're open two millimeters. We don't want to do that. Or someone else  looks and is like, yeah, this thing was adjusted terrible because they were open two mil -  limeters on one side.  If it’s a CR Splint   [0:10:10]  If it's a CR splint, we're going to confirm our position. What does that mean? That means  we're going to confirm so-called capture of the disc. So to confirm that position, we're go -  ing to have them open and close on the splint and make sure that the disc is in place. Now  the first time they open, they might click, right? Because they got to come on the disc. But  then after that, they should be able to open and close on the appliance. Critical, important  there. On the appliance, in the occlusal position and stay on the disc. And you got to watch  them because this is new and they are not used to necessarily biting into that CR position.  So they might bite back a little bit and then they would click and you don't freak out right  there. You need to watch that their teeth are going into those grooves that are the CR posi -  tion that you established with your bite registration.  Patient Education - TMJ Demonstrator   [0:11:02]  And to go back to our TMJ demonstrator here, that's the normal disc here. This is what  we're going for. But this person has the normal disco relationship with their teeth together.  And the person you're treating does not. The person you're treating, when their teeth are  together, they are off the disc. And then with the splint in between their teeth, that lines up  the condyle disc relationship, i.e. Centric relation. That is what we are confirming. So what  happens if they aren't on the disc? Well, that's a bummer. And you could think, well, did I  make a mistake on my bite registration? If you're using acrylic appliances, which you al -  most assuredly are, there are nylon splints. Almost nobody uses them just because we  can't do anything with it. We can't add to it or we can take away from it, but we can't add to  it easily as nothing bonds to that nylon. And just having a new one made in a different po -  sition is too expensive.  [0:12:04]  So most of the, well not most, virtually all of the thermoform materials and the 3D printed  acrylics, you're going to be able to add acrylic if you need to. In my opinion, this is super  important because when you are first treating a person, you are treating them in a messed  up position or you're treating their messed up joint. Why are you treating them if they don't  have some sort of problem, right? So their muscles are having a problem, their joints hav -  09 /01/25   Page   of 4   17

SSC 2.0 - 307: Phase One Therapy  ing a problem. They've got a problem or you wouldn't be treating them in the first place. So  the plastic won't change, but they will. So it's very common for people to leave your office  at that first fitting with everything hitting okay and stuff like that. And then they come back  in a few weeks for follow-up and they're off. It's hitting harder on one side. That's normal.  As a matter of fact, as we'll talk about in a bit here, it would be bad if they came in and  their occlusion is exactly the same on the appliance and they're not getting better or  there's problems. You're looking for them to get better and there to actually be changes on  the appliance.  [0:13:20]  The appliance isn't changing, they're changing. And as their inflammation reduces, as their  muscles go back to normal resting lengths and things like that, there will be a change in  the occlusion on the appliance. And that's one of the things you're gonna be watching for.  Okay, so TMJ Demonstrator showing you here what our goal is with that centric relation  appliance. If it's a centric occlusion appliance, then it's just the, is it hitting on both sides?  You might have them test that 60, 61, 62, make sure that's comfortable, stuff like that. CR  though, make gosh darn sure that they're on the disc. One of the things that frankly an -  noys me. I was gonna say it's a pet peeve or concerns me, but it actually annoys me is in  the Facebook group, sometimes people will put things and they, if I ask, it's like, well, did  you know if they're, do you know if they're on the disc? Oh yeah, I'm not sure. Okay, well,  let's figure that out before you ask a question, right? You know, people that talk about un -  lockings, which will be a different section here, but unlocking procedure, it's like, well, did  they click? Well, no, but they opened bigger. Well, then they didn't get unlocked. If they  didn't click, if they didn't go back to reducing disc displacement, they didn't unlock. Really,  really, really, really, really understand this stuff. Not necessarily before you start treating  people, just get in, watch these videos and start treating people as fast as you possibly  can, because you're really not going to understand this until you start treating people, and  then it's going to make sense.  [0:14:54]  But there's plenty of people out there that just try to treat people, and then they just come  to the Facebook group and ask questions when stuff doesn't work based on the stuff that  they've learned before, because they apparently don't know that there's videos in Spencer  Study Club, or I'm not sure what they're thinking. But I've had plenty of people in Spencer  Study Club that have, like, I don't think ever watched the videos. They just think it's like a  Facebook group. This is more than a Facebook group. If you never go on the Facebook  group, I'm okay with that, although the Facebook group is there to support you, and there's  also been years and years and years and years of questions asked and answered on the  Facebook group, so darn near any clinical question you could possibly think of or come up  with has already been answered on the Facebook group, and you can check that out. But  basically memorize these videos, and you will be ready to roll for darn near any type of sit -  uation that's going to arise.  09 /01/25   Page   of 5   17

SSC 2.0 - 307: Phase One Therapy  Eating: With or Without?   [0:15:47]  Now let's talk about eating with or without the appliance. So with our day splint, we're not  going to have a meet with their night guard. So with our lower splint, are we going to have  them eat with it or without it? As I mentioned before, this is another one of my kind of pet  peeves is there's some schools of thought out there that are phase two heavy. They're di -  recting people towards crowning their teeth or doing orthodontics or whatever, but they  don't have a meet with their splint in, which makes no sense to me. So if you are planning  to change the occlusal scheme, why in the heck would you have them take their appliance  out the one time, the multiple times a day, but the one time that they're going to have tooth  contact? Yes, we swallow, but we don't even have to put our teeth together to swallow  necessarily, but to chew and to swallow, we typically do put our teeth together, and then  you're going to have them go without their appliance?  [0:16:49]  That makes no sense. So if phase two is certain, then absolutely positively, yes, eat with  the splint in. And your patients will totally understand this. You're like, yeah, we're going to  eventually change your bite. We're going to do crowns on your teeth, give you a beautiful  smile. We're going to do the orthodontics and do whatever. We're going to change your  bite. We need to make sure you can tolerate that before. That's the cool thing about this  splint therapy is this is going to tell us, is everything cool? Does it feel good in this posi -  tion? This is going to be super important. And they're going to be like, that makes sense.  Okay, so if you're doing phase two, 100% for sure, they're eating with their splint in.  If the Patient has NO Pain   [0:17:24]  If the patient has no pain when chewing or phase two is not certain, then no. Okay, pretty  simple. No pain when chewing and not plan in phase two, then no, they don't need to eat  with a splint in. Why do they need to eat with a splint in? They don't have pain when they  eat. Now you might tell them at the beginning phases that to kind of take it a little bit easy,  no beef jerky every meal or something like that. But you really don't necessarily need to do  that. You could do that even later if they start noticing that their jaw is bothering them when  they eat. But if historically, in their recent history, it doesn't hurt to eat, then you don't need  to have them eat with their appliance in.  [0:18:09]  If the patient has pain when chewing, conversely, then yes. Again, another kind of pet  peeve of mine, lots of patients out there that that is their chief complaint is their jaw hurts  when they chew. And then it's like, okay, well, wear this when you sleep, right? That's kind  of the classic night guard deal. But even people that do daytime splint therapy oftentimes  won't have the patient eat with their splint in. One of the places that I trained, that was their  09 /01/25   Page   of 6   17

SSC 2.0 - 307: Phase One Therapy  belief was the patient never ate with the appliance in. I was like, why would you not have  them eat with the splint in if that's when their problem is? And also, as I've mentioned be -  fore, when we have the patient eat with their splint in, we don't need to talk about what  they can eat because frankly, they can't eat anything with their splint in at first. And then  they get good at it, and then eventually they're awesome at it, and then they don't need it  anymore. Just like the crutches analogy that I've used before.  Splint Therapy Follow-up   [0:19:06]  Now let's talk about follow-up with splint therapy. We have three basic reports that our pa -  tient's going to give us, better, worse, or no change. Now, can you guess which of those is  the worst? You probably said worse, right? No, no change is the worst. Why? Well, be -  cause no change means we probably have an incorrect diagnosis. Whereas better and  worse, better means we're right and they're getting better, obviously. Worse means we're  probably screwing with the right thing. So if you think about it, if we put a piece of plastic in  someone's mouth and that makes them worse, what are we learning? Are they a 1% oc -  cluder? Probably not. Is there something about that increased vertical of that appliance  that is making their muscle pain worse, that's causing their jaw to hurt more? Well, yeah,  and we would then learn through that that this person's probably putting in a lot of time  with their teeth together. If by putting this thing between their teeth, that seems to have irri -  tated their problem. So worse and better means we're on the right track. We're doing  things right.  [0:20:19]  No change is like, that's the worst. No change is like, there should be a change. I've made  you wear this thingy. If you're wearing this thingy, if you really are, there should be a  change. Now, this is important to help your patients understand. And pretty easy, actually.  So most dentists, again, I think most dentists hate bringing up potential side effects and  things like that. Oh, the patient's going to think about that and be concerned about that.  That's the wrong way to think about it. If you go to your medical doctor and they're doing  pretty much anything, they're often going to say, hey, you might have some mild side ef -  fects with this medication, or you might have this happen with this, or you might have this  happen with this. If you go to the physical therapist, like we talked about before, they're  going to tell you, hey, this is going to hurt. It's going to hurt what I'm about to do right now.  And then you're going to get better. Or they may say, what we did today might kind of flare  this up a little bit because I was really in there digging on that muscle that's hurting you  and kind of that might irritate it. I'm trying to create a healing process. And you would be  like, okay, that seems reasonable.  [0:21:29]  Okay. So tell your patients that this might increase some of their symptoms for the short  term, that they might have more headaches. They might have more jaw pain. They might  09 /01/25   Page   of 7   17

SSC 2.0 - 307: Phase One Therapy  have more problems. And then that'll be an indication to them that we're on the right track.  We're dealing with the right thing here. Their ears might ring worse. Other things might  happen. Just give them that heads up. Most people won't get worse. But those who do will  then not just like throw the splint in the trash and never call you again. They'll be like, okay,  well, doctor said that this could happen. I'm one of those people that this happens to. I un -  derstand that we're on the right track here.  Better   [0:22:05]  All right. Now let's talk about each of these. So better, well, we're probably going to stay  the course, right? Somebody comes in, they're doing better. Makes sense to just stay the  course. Depending on your desired outcome, this may be for weeks or it may be months,  depending on what our goal is, what our pathway is, what our game plan is. After four to  six months, faster in teenagers, also faster in people that you're incorporating PRF. Con -  sider weaning if that's part of the plan. All right. So the four to six months, that's kind of his -  torical standards. This is giving the person time to heal everything going well. If they're  younger, if their problem was less severe, and by that, I don't necessarily mean what you  see on x-rays. I think it's more what the patient says. But you can get people better pretty  fast. And if you're doing PRF with this, what we are seeing in our practices is we are wean -  ing people off quite a bit faster than we did in the past. So typically, again, in the past, it's  been about three or four months. We're starting that weaning process. Now it's two to  three months that we're starting that weaning process. So keep that in mind. And again,  this is if there's no phase two, stuff like that. That's why we're doing that weaning process.  Worse   [0:23:28]  Okay, what if they're worse? Well, stay the course? Maybe, right? Because, as I men -  tioned before, worse could be an indication of you're messing with the right thing. So we  don't immediately throw the appliance under the bus. We don't immediately abort the mis -  sion just because the patient says they're worse. We ask questions. What's worse? When  is it worse? Why do you think it's worse? Get as much information as you can going  through that OPQRST again of what's going on when it's worse. What makes it better  when it's worse? What makes it worse? What's the quality of the pain when it's worse?  Where does it hurt now? Is it a different spot now? That can be tricky, by the way. So  sometimes people say, oh yeah, it's worse. Well, tell me about it.  [0:24:16]  Oh yeah, I got this headache all the time. Well, you didn't even mention headaches before.  Well, yeah, that's what I mean. That's why it's worse. What about your jaw pain? Oh, I  don't have jaw pain anymore. Okay, so you don't have jaw pain anymore, but you have a  09 /01/25   Page   of 8   17

SSC 2.0 - 307: Phase One Therapy  headache. Uh-huh. Okay, well, there you go. Now we're getting somewhere because it's  working on the jaw pain. The fact that they have a headache probably means they're biting  on it. Now, biting on it can't hurt the jaw joint anymore. You've given them basically a hel -  met to protect the jaw joint, but the clenching is increasing the tension with that temporal  tendon, and now we got a problem. So don't ever just stop with, yes, it's worse. You got to  ask those follow-up questions. What's the scale of the pain? What's the timing? When is it  hurting them? OPQRST, those are the questions you're going to ask.  Making a New Diagnosis and Make a Change   [0:25:01]  Make a new diagnosis. Now, again, and I just kind of give you an example of a new diag -  nosis, is the joint pain, the retrodiscitis, let's say, is better, and now they have temporal  tendonitis. So you might have a new diagnosis pop up. They have pain behind the eye. If  they have it back here and it goes behind the eye, stuff like that, there may be some mus -  cles at play now where at first it was more of a joint problem. Make a change based on  your diagnosis. Now, in the example that I've kind of used here of the person, the joint pain  is better, and now they've got some temporal tendonitis, well, then we might modify things  a little bit. Maybe we modify their sleep appliance, their nighttime appliance, to more of an  NTI style of appliance, perhaps. Maybe we have them taking out the splint more during the  day. Maybe, most importantly, we teach them or reinforce with them lips together, teeth  apart. You ask the question, are you noticing that your teeth together a bit? Oh, yeah, my  gosh, I'm biting on this thing all the time. Okay, remember, that's one of the chief reasons  we got you wearing this during the day, is to remind you not to put your teeth together. Oh,  I'm so sorry, I forgot about it. I thought I was supposed to put my teeth on it. Okay, be  ready for that. People are going to do that. People are going to say, well, I thought I was  supposed to do that. Okay, actually, let me go on an aside here a little bit, and a little tan -  gent, and explain why that is.  [0:26:37]  The more you make it about that bite on there, and the more, like if you're using multiple  colors of paper, or you've got a T-scan that you bought 10 years ago before you met me,  and you're like, well, I spent 30 grand on this thing, I might as well use it, and you're doing  stuff like that, the more you make it about their bite, the more the patient will think, okay,  yeah, I spent an hour dialing this in, I better just hang out here all the time, I think. So you  have to tell them. At the end of doing whatever you want to do, it's like, okay, I've got  everything dialed in, now your job, lips together, teeth apart. Your job, lips together, teeth  apart. I will handle how this all hits together. You don't ever think about it. All you think  about is lips together, teeth apart. Things are going to change, don't care. You don't worry  about that at all. You come back to me, I'll look for that stuff. You just worry about lips to -  gether, teeth apart. Okay, so that is a big mistake that people make, is they will do the  splint therapy stuff, they don't ever ask these questions about what people are doing, and  09 /01/25   Page   of 9   17

SSC 2.0 - 307: Phase One Therapy  then they'll make some assumptions that are actually wrong. So the making the change  would be based on your new diagnosis, but the change you might make in this scenario is  stop it. The change you might make is stop clenching your teeth on that all day long. Lips  together, teeth apart.  Consider Following up via Phone   [0:28:07]  Consider following up via phone with a quicker return visit. And why this is, is clearly none  of us like to be worse. You don't like them to be worse. This is bad for everybody, right? So  when you have somebody that's worse, and you've made a new diagnosis, or you're stay -  ing the course, or whatever you're doing, it's more comforting for the patient for you to say,  what, here's why things going on. Let's use the lips together, teeth apart thing. Here's why  things going on. I think you may have been resting your teeth on the appliance. I apologize  we didn't make that more clear to you that actually you're not supposed to do that. So lips  together, teeth apart is really this mantra I want you having all the time. Lips together, teeth  apart, lips together, teeth apart. So tell you what, let's try that and let's, you know call me,  call my office, we can send you a text message, whatever, send us a text message in two  days.  [0:29:00]  So give this two days, 48 hours to try that and let me know, worse, better, no change in  two days, okay? And the patient's gonna be like, okay, that sounds cool. So don't be like,  all right, I'll see you in three weeks because if things are worse and I'll see you in three or  four weeks, they might leave thinking, suck, I'm gonna be worse now for another month?  This is not at all what I'd hoped for. Okay, so I would quickly communicate, get back with  them if things are worse, just to give them the confidence that this is not super weird, this  is not abnormal, the doctor cares about me, they care that I am reporting being worse and  they're going to get me back quicker than this. And if you, let's say you charge for every  appointment or something like that, this might be one it's like, hey, just I just want to hear  from you in a couple days, I don't need to get you in or anything like that, I just want to  hear from you and no charge or anything like that, I just need to hear from you in a couple  days, stuff like that, okay?  No Change   [0:30:03]  All right, what about no change? Stay the course? Well, maybe. Remember all about ask -  ing the questions because the same thing can happen, it's like, well, how's it doing? Well,  yeah, there's really no difference. Okay, so you used to say that the jaw pain was eight on  a zero to burned alive scale, 10 being burned alive, and what is it now? Four. Okay, that  kind of sounds like a change. So don't just take on face value when they say things like no  09 /01/25   Page   of 10   17

SSC 2.0 - 307: Phase One Therapy  change, worse all this stuff, even better for that matter. So make sure you're following up  with other questions. But if it was no change, you might still stay the course based on their  response and based on your evaluation. If you have them in a CR appliance, for example,  and they say no change, but you're noticing no popping or clicking, their range of motion is  better, objectively, they're doing well, stay the course, maybe point out to them again what  the goals of therapy are.  Make a New Diagnosis   [0:31:03]  Make a new diagnosis. There you go. So we might be wrong. And this no change is the  most common time for us to be wrong. We treated based on our tentative diagnosis, and  it's wrong. So they don't have a muscle problem from clenching their teeth. And so you  gave them the splint and they spend no time on their teeth in the first place. So now you  put a piece of plastic on their teeth and they still don't spend any time on their teeth. You've  changed their vertical a little bit, but they put their teeth together so little that doesn't even  matter. Maybe they got something else going on. So make a new diagnosis. If it's like this  isn't making any sense, you should have had a difference with this therapy. Make a  change based on that diagnosis. If you have a new tentative diagnosis, and I'm not saying  these are definitive diagnoses, right? This is more treating empirically. You are doing what  you think is right. And then you're getting that patient's feedback to then decide next steps.  And that's called treating people empirically. That's what you're doing here.  Consider Following up via Phone   [0:32:12]  Consider following up via phone or a quicker return visit in the no change person too. So  the person who is doing well, we're going to get them back for the kind of the regular fol -  low-up. The person who's doing worse or the person that's no change, that one we want to  do a little bit quicker. Again, not necessarily that they absolutely need a quicker follow-up.  It's more psychologically they need a quicker follow-up because they are paying you for an  outcome. They're not paying you for pieces of plastic. Their goal is not to wear this piece of  plastic for the rest of their life. Their goal is to get better whatever their chief complaint  was. That's their goal. And when that's not happening, then they start to get concerned. A  lot of even how you charge will have a big difference with this. Like if you're like, yeah,  everything's included for three months. And that first follow-up was at three or four weeks.  Well, in their mind, a whole third of that three months is already gone. And now if you're  like, all right, yeah, let's get you back in a month. Okay, that means the next time they  come back, that two thirds of the three month period are gone. What if they still aren't bet -  ter? What if they still haven't had a change? Now I only got one more month to get better.  You're going to start charging me again. This will be going through their head. This will be  09 /01/25   Page   of 11   17

SSC 2.0 - 307: Phase One Therapy  going through their head. So depending on even how you set up your financials can make  a big difference on how the patient gets better and their concerns that will make them not  get better.  [0:33:38]  If they are concerned about, hey, I'm going to have to start paying here pretty quick, then  they won't get better as fast, ironically. So they would want to get better, right? But they're  going to be worried that they don't get better. For this reason, I tend to encourage people  who have case fees to have longer case fees. So that, this covers everything we do for  you for up to six months. The vast majority of our patients are better in three to four  months, we're weaning you off, but should more go on and we need to extend your treat -  ment a little bit, that covers you for this amount of time. Okay, or you could extend that a  little bit longer. You don't want it forever because you will have some weirdos every once in  a while that would just stay on your treatment for the rest of their lives.  [0:34:24]  So I don't encourage you to make it unlimited either, but I do encourage you to make it  long enough that they don't have to worry about, I got to get everything in here because  I'm only covered for 90 days or whatever. And if you're working with insurance, which most  TMD you don't, but if you are, then that could be kind of a problem because you're going to  do it on this 90 day thing.   They're all about insurance probably, or they wouldn't come to  you in the first place, perhaps, or one of the reasons they said yes is because it was cov -  ered by their insurance. You're doing the whole, hey, this is 90 day type of thing, global pe -  riod, that's covered. And then after that, we're charging you and your insurance may or  may not help you with that. All that's going to be in their head.  What About Vertical?   [0:35:06]  All right. What about vertical? So vertical matters in some people. And the big thing with  vertical is not too tall, just like with our sleep appliance, right? If we take away all of their  freeway space, then they're going to have a tendency to rest on their appliance. So if the  vertical on it is too high, then they kind of have no choice. So all of us have that vertical,  right? So when we do that 60, 61, 62, that closest speaking space, and then we close from  there, okay, remember with the dentures, you put the mark on their nose and their chin  and have them kind of mama and all those kinds of sounds. And then you would have  them close and we would see that difference between their speaking jaw position and then  the wax bite that we'd made or whatever. We're checking that vertical.  [0:35:58]  Same thing with people who have teeth is that vertical. We can't have it too tall. Now, there  are some telltale signs of vertical being off. And those tend to be neck pain or muscle pain.  This can be a little bit confusing because it can go either way. So high or low, high or low  can cause people to have these problems. Most of the time, high, most of the time high for  09 /01/25   Page   of 12   17

SSC 2.0 - 307: Phase One Therapy  the reason I just said. If you take away their freeway space, they're going to rest on their  appliance and they're going to activate muscles that they normally don't activate that could  hurt. If it's too low, now you might say, well, it's always going to be higher than their teeth  used to be. That's true. So that's why it's usually high is our problem, not low because any -  thing you put on their teeth is higher than it used to be. So mostly too high. But every once  in a blue moon, it's going to be too low.  Ask the Patient   [0:37:00]  Now, remember what we talked about in level two with the oral appliances, same thing ap -  plies here is ask, does the appliance feel too tall or too small? Does it feel too high or like  it's not high enough? And people will tell you. And the people that it's too small, too low,  they will say, yeah, it seems like it needs to be a little higher. That would be more comfort -  able. All right. And then I kind of play the whole, well, you're with yourself 24 hours a day,  so maybe and we'll add a little plastic to that and build them up a little bit. You'll see this  also more down the road. So people that you've gotten them better and they've weaned off  their day splint and now they just use a nighttime appliance and their nighttime appliance  will wear down over time. And for reasons that I can't completely understand or explain,  when they wear down like barely worn down, they can come back and have problems.  Now, again, you'll look at the appliance and there's no flipping way that if you had calipers,  you'd be able to say, oh yeah, you've worn down a whole millimeter. No, no, no, they  haven't. Like they will wear down a quarter of a millimeter perhaps. And then all of a sud -  den they will have some problems.  [0:38:18]  So we add some acrylic there. We have them tap, tap, tap. Okay. So if I put acrylic on you  and then I go tap, tap, tap, we're only adding a fraction of a millimeter typically. And we  smooth it down. Everything's good. And that person will be good for another several years  usually. And then they'll wear that down a little bit and eventually they'll start to have dis -  comfort again. We build it up and then they're okay again. All right. So be prepared for  that, that it's that real sensitive to that vertical. Only some people. And nowadays, by the  way, so my mentor, this was everyone, right? So everyone would come back that he had  treated and everyone who had a problem, it was because either stopped wearing their  night guard or because their night guard had worn down. And we'd build up their night  guard or get them back into a night guard and they would be fine. These are people that  had either full mouth reconstruction or had their posterior teeth built up typically as was  what he would do.  [0:39:15]  And I have mentioned to you that I think that a lot of time he was accidentally treating their  airway. And so when those people started coming in after I understood the airway better, I  would evaluate them for possible sleep apnea. And a ton of those people actually had  09 /01/25   Page   of 13   17

SSC 2.0 - 307: Phase One Therapy  sleep apnea. And then we would switch them to a sleep style appliance instead of a Ferris  style night guard, and then they did great. We just gave them something that kept their jaw  from falling backwards, and they actually did much, much better because probably for  them, they were posturing their jaw at nighttime to try to protect their own airway. And once  we gave them an appliance that did that for them and allowed them to relax, then they did  actually better. Now there's some other stuff, something called the Shimbashi. So this is  the gingival margin between 8 and 24, and the so-called ideal is 19 millimeters. So you  can measure that and say, okay, where is this? This is a thing that's been around for a  long, long time. I don't typically use that, but just I throw that out there as an idea of anoth -  er thing you can do. And then as I just mentioned, you ask the patient, too tall, too small,  too high, not high enough.  Adjunctive Therapies?   [0:40:28]  What about adjunctive therapy? So I've listed a whole boatload of stuff here on the screen,  and all of these things can be fabulous. And not uncommon in our Facebook group or just  members of Spencer Study Club, particularly those who are relatively new, to, hey, what  do you think of this? What do you think of TENS? What do you think of laser? What do you  think of red light? What do you think of this and this and this and this? And what I think of  them is great. What I don't love is dentists doing them in-house. And why I don't love that  is because you probably don't have capacity to do that. It takes a lot of capacity to have  people come in, sometimes multiple times a week, for adjunctive therapies. Lasers, ion -  tophoresis, pushing the steroid through the joint. Now, again, I wouldn't even recommend  you do that anymore now that we have PRF. But even things like laser, and there's multi -  ple members of Spencer Study Club that have lasers, non-cutting lasers, that they will use,  that the patients love it, and they will come in for it.  [0:41:41]  But the dentists who have that and are using it tend to have lots of operatories, and it's  quick. The procedure is only five to ten minutes, perhaps. They do have to have a staff  member do it. The patient can't do it themselves. And this is one of the reasons that I'm a  big advocate of red light therapy, where you can have the patient get their own unit, and  the unit's like 500 bucks or something like that, and they can treat themselves every day. I  way prefer that you do that than you buy a $25,000 laser, and the patient has to come into  your office all the time. It's just more simple, and it's more effective. Even from a placebo  effect, and remember, in treatment, there's nothing wrong with placebo. Placebo is kind of  awesome. Let's get the patient's brain on this with us, on the same side. And to have  somebody that, like, every day they're doing something.  [0:42:36]  Like, for example, I use red light myself, and so does my wife, and we use it... I use it any -  way. I don't notice her doing this every day, but I use it in the morning and the night. Pretty  09 /01/25   Page   of 14   17

SSC 2.0 - 307: Phase One Therapy  much always. I have two big red light panels. I encourage you to get these. And I have one  in front and one in back, so I don't have to rotisserie chicken myself, right? And it helps. I  can track it. I track my sleep every night with my Garmin watch and stuff, and I can tell  when I'm using it when I'm not using it.  [0:43:08]  Is it exact correlation? No, because it's more complicated than just, was I exposed to red  light infrared or was I not? There's other things that go into this, but I know it helps. And  there's a bunch of Spencer Study Club members who have noticed the same, that their  sleep is improved when they use their red light therapy. That's awesome because they  have it at home. I wouldn't love that if I had to have a line of people around the building us -  ing the red light every day at my office, and that's what my office became was give me five  bucks for the 10 minutes of red light therapy, and let's just run you through here. Not my  style. So consider all of these things as positive, but before you buy stuff, consider do you  have capacity for that? Is there another way? Yeah, low-level laser is cool, but would it be  maybe more cool if the patient had the red light infrared therapy at their house and used it  that way? And one other thing to consider is if you're feeling like you got a whole boatload  of adjunctive therapies.  Check Your Diagnosis!   [0:44:24]  Check your diagnosis. Are you right? So if your diagnosis is right, I don't know that the pa -  tient needed 50 different things to go on. And that's another kind of pet peeve of mine.  There's some schools of thought out there that they get so flippant complicated of like,  well, yeah, you do this, but then you also have to have the myofunctional therapy, and you  have to have this, and you got to get the tongue tie released, and you have to have make  sure that they are gluten-free and make sure that they're whatever. And we go, now all that  stuff could be true. Don't get me wrong. But it becomes so gosh darn complex that no pa -  tient is ever going to go through the whole thing. And what I've seen in people that kind of  believe in that model, so to speak, is they tend to throw the patient under the bus.  [0:45:13]  It's like, well, you didn't do this. You didn't go to that chiropractor, that hole-in-one chiro -  practor that I told you to go to. You didn't go to that special physical therapist that deals  with breathing like I told you to. You didn't go to the cranial sacral therapist that I told you  to go to. And I know you went to cranial sacral therapy, but you didn't go to the cranial  sacral therapist that I told you to go to, so that's why this isn't getting better. Now, having  said all that, we work with a physical therapist a lot. We refer a ton of people to physical  therapy. Physical therapists will tend to do adjunctive therapies, and they tend to do man -  ual therapies, and it tends to be on a limited basis. They'll do 5-10 treatments, and that's  pretty much it. The other cool thing that they do is they give people exercises. I love all  that. I like them to do that. With TMD, usually physical therapy and stuff like that will be  09 /01/25   Page   of 15   17

SSC 2.0 - 307: Phase One Therapy  covered by the patient's insurance. It's kind of weird, right? Because you would think, well,  they're treating for the same thing I am.  [0:46:07]  Why aren't I covered by insurance? That's the way it works. So they will go there, and the  physical therapist will code it as neck pain, headache, whatever. They won't put TMJ,  which isn't a diagnosis anyway, really. So they will get it covered by their insurance. Let  those people handle that stuff, and it's, I think, much better for the patient in that case, too.  It's not forever. It's a period of time. They'll get better quicker, and if they don't, then once  again, we're checking our diagnosis. We're like, what's going on here? This is weird. We've  got them in splint therapy. I've got them over the physical therapist, who's awesome, and  they're not making progress. We better check our diagnosis.  [0:46:49]  Remember, when we are using PRF, when we're using regenerative TMD techniques, the  splint therapy is crutches. I cannot more strongly encourage you to think of it that way and  to express that with your patients. For decades and decades, for my entire career, and  way before that, it's been all about the piece of plastic. It's been all about the splint. That's  why there's so many darn splints. Even now, in 2025, there's new splints that will be de -  veloped where, oh, this splint does this magical thing. I'm like, I'm like, guys, and they're  usually now done by, well, you never know, but they're usually, the newest ones that I've  seen, newest ones, nothing new is under the sun, by the way. These have all been done in  the past, but some one in their 30s will think that they have come up with some fantastic  thing, and again, they're almost always thinking teeth together all the time, but if you ask  that doctor, hey, how much time should people have their teeth together? They're going to  say, oh, almost never, and then you say, well, what does your splint do? Regardless of all  that, ever since we've had thought processes about this, it's been about the plastic.  Change that script. Help the patient understand these splints are splints. These splints are  crutches. The real healing is you. It is your body healing itself, and the good thing about  the jaw joints, unlike our knees and our hips, these joints don't bear weight, so we can  have actually pretty screwed up jaw joints and do okay. Use them as crutches. The patient  will understand that, and then the PRF is doing the majority of the work, or rather said ac -  tually more appropriately, their body is doing the majority of the work.  [0:48:38]  No one is like, hey, these crutches aren't working. Okay, I don't think anyone's ever said  that. They're like, well, yeah, the knee surgery didn't work very well, or I'm not healing like I  should be from this injury. They're not like, man, these stupid crutches. These crutches  don't work at all, but splint therapy, on the other hand, people blame the splints all the  time. It's, oh, you got the wrong splint. Your splint hits wrong. Your splint's on the wrong  arch. Your splint doesn't do this. No. No one would do that with crutches. We shouldn't do  it here either, and if you're doing PRF, this should be your focus, and boy, I cannot more  strongly encourage you to use PRF. As a matter of fact, I'll go so strong as to say if you are  not doing PRF, you should not be treating TMJ problems. In my mind, malpractice. Now,  let me give you a get out of jail free card there, unless you can't in your area. Like, if it's  09 /01/25   Page   of 16   17

SSC 2.0 - 307: Phase One Therapy  against the law for you to do a joint injection, then all right, I'll give you a pass on that one,  but then find someone who can.  [0:49:44]  Oral surgeon, orthopedic surgeon, just regular medical doctor, don't care, but if I'm you, I  would not, so let's put it this way, if any member of my family has a TMJ problem, they are  getting PRF, like for sure, guaranteed, no other options. Even if they were scared of nee -  dles, I would get them PRF. I would get them through it. It is that important. So my only you  get out of jail free card is I can't do that, Jamison, in my state. It's against the law. All right,  someone can. Someone can do that. You partner with them and like, all right, here's how  this works in my office is I'm gonna have you see my friend Dr. Blank and such, the ortho -  pedic surgeon. She's gonna give you a shot in your jaw joint of PRF. She's gonna do that  once a month for three months. I'm gonna be treating you with these crutches to help with  the healing process here and everything else. I'm gonna kind of quarterback the whole  thing here, but she's gonna do these injections that are critically important. Okay? That is  what I'd recommend.  [0:50:49]  And remember, when we're using PRF, we're usually not treating completely normal joints,  but sometimes we are. But just remember, if it's a reducing disc displacement, we may  help them stay on the disc, that would result in a bite change. If it's a non-reducing disc  displacement, probably we won't have a bite change, and we should make it less likely for  them to wear through. If we have a DJD case, there's a possibility that you could help  some bone grow back there, that could result in a bite change. We don't change anything  here, we just educate them, like we always do, with the TMJ demonstrator there, that as  they heal, there could be a change in how their teeth come together, and that may be  something we need to deal with, may be something that we don't need to deal with, but  just remember, with PRF, there's a different level of healing going on, so step up your  game on the informed consent to let them know that there could be some very positive  changes occur in their joints, in their muscles, and that may alter how their teeth come to -  gether. Don't forget that.  [outro music]  09 /01/25   Page   of 17   17

