SSC 2.0 - 308: Phase Two Therapy & TMD with OSA  SSC 2.0   Level 3  308: Phase Two Therapy & TMD with OSA  [intro music]  Phase II   [0:00:12]  All right, let's talk about phase two now. If phase two is planned from the beginning, then I  wouldn't wean the patient off unless, dot, dot, dot, duh, drama here, right? Unless it's a  person that's been in a car accident or some other accident and you're trying to prove  something potentially for court. That is when I would wean off somebody even when you  plan phase two. So let me give you an example there. So you have somebody, they've  been in a car accident, maybe they've had their teeth broken. So we know for sure that we  are going to be changing their bite or we're going to be restoring their teeth because of the  trauma they've had. And maybe they have a disc displacement that they claimed they  didn't have before. There's no record of them having a disc displacement before. Now they  do. So we put them into CR, they're doing well in CR, and that's going to result in a bite  change, right? And it just is logical that we go ahead and change them into this better posi -  tion since their accident.  [0:01:18]  Why wean off? Well, because someone like me could be on the other side and say, well,  you probably should have tried to wean them off and you don't know that they couldn't  wean off. You don't know if they were a 1% occluder and they barely put their teeth to -  gether and they could have tolerated being in their old occlusal position much easier to  just be like, so we tried to wean them off and the patient started having problems again.  The patient didn't like how that felt. Okay, if I was reviewing a case and someone had  phase two, but those were in the notes that, yep, we did phase one and they did really, re -  ally well. And so we tried to actually take them off of the splint during the day and they tried  and they tried and they really couldn't. It just wasn't as comfortable. I'm going to be like,  yep, okay, that doctor did everything appropriately. That is when I would try to wean off in  someone that we are planning phase two. Otherwise, no reason to wean them off. If you  are taking someone and you are planning full mouth reconstruction for aesthetic purposes,  why would you wean them off? So if you've got them in that spot and remember going to  eat with their splint in and everything, then we don't wean off.  [0:02:29]  We go from that splint position and everything's awesome to full mouth. And you could go  through temporaries, which you've got to have temporaries on anyway, right? But you  might even think of not necessarily quicker on the splint therapy, but maybe slightly longer  on the temporaries. You might put them into temporaries that are awesome, like really high  09 /01/25   Page   of 1   16

SSC 2.0 - 308: Phase Two Therapy & TMD with OSA  quality temporaries that look like teeth, that chew like teeth, and let them use those for a  couple months before you get those final restorations made. Because if the person is hav -  ing any problems, then you could adjust the occlusion at that point before you go to the  final restorations. That would be a smart thing for you to do.  If You Weren’t Necessarily Planning Phase II   [0:03:14]  Okay, if you weren't necessarily planning phase two, but you try to wean and the patient  can't, then our options are equilibration. So if they're like smacking on a tooth or two, you  could try some equilibration. You could do orthodontics, we're going to pull the teeth to -  gether. You could do restorative dentistry, or you could do orthognathic surgery or a com -  bination of the above. As you know, orthognathic surgery often requires orthodontics. So  those are all things that you could go down the road of if you need to. This is why we have  the conversation with people at the beginning, because none of those things are great as  far as the patient is concerned, and you don't want them surprised. Our medical col -  leagues do a crappy job with this kind of stuff. They will give you a three, four, five, six  page informed consent that has everything in the world on it, including you dying, but they  don't really explain it very well. And we as dentists, we don't tend to give the 10 page doc -  ument, nor do we tend to explain the side effects that well. So I think it's always better to  give people that heads up of like, hey, we might need to go down this road. And you can  give them the caveat of, but we rarely need to. We rarely need to. It's like one in a hun -  dred, you could say, or even one in a thousand cases. And you're like, well, I haven't treat -  ed a thousand people, Jamison, I have no clue. And say, you know, my mentor and I,  we've treated thousands of patients. We find this to be extremely rare. However, you could  be that rare case. That's funny when you say that, by the way, a lot of your patients will be  like, yeah, I usually am.  [0:04:53]  Great. So they've kind of... Now they probably won't be, but they've kind of raised their  hand that they're a little bit of a victim there... I mean, they're not a victim, but they're just  telling you, yeah, sometimes stuff happens to me that doesn't happen to other people.  Okay, so that's them being cool with it moving forward and then never down the road. And  they're going to be like, well, wait a second, you said that almost nobody needed orthodon -  tics. And you'd be like, well, I did say that. And then remember I said, but you might. Oh  yeah, that's right. Okay, so go over this with them. Don't shy away from the side effects.  And remember that the side effects we're talking about are not negative. As a matter of  fact, let me dive deeper into that for a moment. Why would we do phase two? So the only  reason we do phase two is they've done really well with splint therapy, but we couldn't  wean them off the splint. Say that again. The only reason we are considering phase two is  splint therapy has been very successful. Pain is gone. Dysfunction is gone. They're doing  awesome. We just try to have them go without the splint and they can't without those  09 /01/25   Page   of 2   16

SSC 2.0 - 308: Phase Two Therapy & TMD with OSA  symptoms coming back or it just feels weird to them. They just don't like it. They prefer  how it feels with the splint in. We don't want them to wear a splint the rest of their life.  That's phase two.  What is Not Phase II?   [0:06:23]  What is not phase two? The splint therapy didn't work in the first place. Well then there's  no flipping way that we're going to crown their teeth or put them into orthodontics. Now  that shocks me how often phase two type treatments are done on people who didn't prop -  erly have phase one. There's someone recently that we treated with PRF who had been  told she needed joint replacement surgery and she had gnarly joints granted but there was  some dentist at that point who is treating her with Invisalign to improve her jaw problem.  He was moving her teeth because he thought it was all about her occlusion right, and her  joints were destroyed right like nasty terrible arthritis but this dentist thought oh yeah you  know if only her occlusion was a little bit better let's try it with Invisalign. It makes no sense  to me but that's what was being done. He went straight to phase two. He didn't start with  phase one. He went straight to phase two assuming that this was the problem. The only  reason we ever go to phase two is phase one was successful. If phase one is not success -  ful certainly phase two is not indicated. Phase one is the blueprints. Phase one is the  game plan. Phase one is the map. If there's anything during that phase one period that  we're like, we're wrong, okay we're, this is not the right map this is not the right blueprint  there's some changes need to be made here we would never go on with that next phase.  Phase one must be successful in order for phase two to be even considered.  Weaning Protocol   [0:08:00]  So how do we wean people off the splint? I've talked about weaning many many times  here and you're like how do I wean people off Jamison? Well let me tell you. Step one we  take the day splint out to eat for one soft meal a day. Now you're thinking, well hey Jami -  son what if I don't have them eat with a splint in? Awesome you're already there. So if  you... This is one of the reasons we don't have people eat with a splint in just for the heck  of it. We only have people eat with a splint in if they have pain when they eat or we're  planning phase two in which case we're not going to wean them off anyway unless it was  that accident scenario right. So in someone who doesn't have pain when they chew we  don't have them eat with the splint in from the beginning and these people will wean off a  lot faster typically. So here we're in the scenario of someone who has been wearing it to  eat as soon as we get them to the point where they're feeling better their functions better  everything's good and again using the crutches analogy there, they've gotten really good  with the crutches, they can eat what they want to, it's really no problem, you know, it's still  09 /01/25   Page   of 3   16

SSC 2.0 - 308: Phase Two Therapy & TMD with OSA  gross but they can eat what they want to with the splint in. This is when we start having  them take it out one meal a day. Then they work up to eating all meals with the splint out  so all they do here is they take it out they eat and they put it back in.  [0:09:17]  Okay, so the first step of the weaning protocol is take it out to eat one meal, do that for two  or three days, if everything's cool work up to two meals, if everything's cool after two or  three days, all meals basically with the splint out. Then next after eating without the splint  leave the splint out for one hour after meals for three days. Now on this one typically how it  goes is the person is taking out to eat and what I'll say to them if there's a follow-up and  this could be telemedicine follow-up they don't really need to come in for you to have this  conversation. I'll say hey was there ever a time and you can be honest with me here and  not trying to catch on something here, was there ever a time that you took the splint out to  eat and then you forgot to put it back in, and they'll be like, well, yeah. Okay cool again no  foul there I'm sure I would do the same thing. Here's my question for you though, did you  put the splint back in because it hurt and you put the splint back in or did you put the splint  back in because you just remembered that you didn't have it in.  [0:10:24]  Okay, you're hoping they say, oh, I just remembered. If they say, well, yeah, kind of hurt  and so I put it back in. Okay. So either response is fine but if they say, oh, actually, yeah, I  just remembered that I didn't have it in, I put it back in, cool. Okay so eat with it out all  meals then we're gonna work up to one hour after meals on purpose. So they will eat and  kind of set alarm on their watch, give themselves one hour after meals then they pop it in.  They do that for three days, if no symptoms return then, okay can I be any more clear with  the all caps here, THE ONLY REASON THEY’RE GOING TO THE NEXT STEP OF THE  WEANING PROCESS IS EVERYTHING IS COOL do not have a patient go through step  two three four of the weaning process and they're like, oh, my gosh, yeah this has killed  me ever since the beginning why I tried to go without it to eat. They should never have  gone there, so you didn't explain it right these weaning protocols are in the document cen -  ter, so you've got a printed thing for them to take home with them that walks them through  this.   But make sure they are clear that they are never to go to the next step unless they  don't have pain. So the only reason they go to the next step is everything's cool. if some of  their symptoms start to come back they need to stop, let you know what's going on and not  proceed, they have to go back a little bit.  Leave Splint Out for 2 Hours   [0:11:45]  Okay, next. So that was one hour, next step leave the splint out for two hours after meals.  Do this for three days. If no symptoms return, then we wear the splint for a couple hours in  the morning, a couple hours in the evening for three days. If no symptoms return, then  wear the day splint when needed. So there's the entire weaning protocol. Now if they have  09 /01/25   Page   of 4   16

SSC 2.0 - 308: Phase Two Therapy & TMD with OSA  symptoms return, then you just back up. Just back up to the step before and let them stay  there for a while. There's no race. Let them know this. There's no, it's not, not a... They  have to wean off in three weeks or something. It's not a race. It's, you know, do you want  all your teeth crowned? Probably not. Do you want to go into braces as an adult? Probably  not. Let's take our time. So if it takes them three or four days at each step or a week at  each step, so what? Just let them do this, but three days minimum. Okay, I don't want  people like, oh yeah, I just took it out and I'm fine. That might be too quick. So we want  them to do this three-day protocol.  [0:12:48]  Once again, eating is step one to go through the process to not eat with it in anymore.  Step two is, so step one may take multiple days. You understand that? Because they're  going to go from one meal to two meals to three meals. Step two is leaving it out for an  hour after meals. Step three is leaving it out for two hours after meals. Step four is a little in  the morning, a little in the afternoon. And then step five is when they feel like it. And what  I'll typically say here is you might use it at quote times of stress. And this is times that the  patient catches themselves with their teeth together. And regardless of how hard they've  tried to be the world's best lips together, teeth apart person, your patient by this stage of  the game, they're going to know. It's like, you know what? When I drive, my teeth are to -  gether. I mean, I just can't help it. I'm trying. I got a post-it note like right there on my dash -  board that says lips together, teeth apart. I cannot do this. When I am driving, I'm kind of a  white knuckle driver. I'm teeth together and I'm just trying not to get killed by all the idiots  on the road. That's my jam. All right, bummer. So in that case, they're going to wear the  splint when they drive, not necessarily to give them the helmet there of I can't help myself,  so I need a helmet, although that is part of it, but to give them another layer of reminder of  lips together, teeth apart. Remember that day splint is more of a biofeedback device than  anything. Yes, in a CR splint, it is guiding their jaw into that position when they put their  teeth together. But the big part of it is learning lips together, teeth apart. That's the main  focus of that daytime appliance. But you will have patients   that, and this is, I don't know,  super high, but I'd say 10, 20% of your patients are going to use that day splint from time  to time and they'll know when.  [0:14:48]  Some people use it when they work out. I had a patient once that was a... She didn't make  it into the Olympics, but she was really good marathoner and she went to the women's  Olympic trials. She was that good to get into the Olympic trials. She didn't make it in the  Olympics, but she was dang fast and she would run with her splint in, which I thought was  interesting. So at that level, at a marathon, most marathons, you're running aerobically,  except for certain parts of it, then you may get a little anaerobic for a while. If you're aero -  bic, you can usually just breathe through your nose. You don't have to breathe through  your mouth. If you're breathing through your nose, you could have your teeth together.  Okay. Every once in a while, have your teeth together. And she kind of liked that feeling.  So when she went to the Olympic trials, I told her, I'm like, all right, I know you've been  training with the appliance in, but if at mile 18 of the marathon and you're thinking this  09 /01/25   Page   of 5   16

SSC 2.0 - 308: Phase Two Therapy & TMD with OSA  thing's driving me crazy, you spit it out, throw it in the trash and I'll make you another one  after the Olympic trials. I don't want this to cause any problems for you. It didn't, but that's  a unique situation there. So people will tend to know when they need this and then they'll  just use it. They'll use it for that. They'll use it when they drive. They'll use it maybe when  they work out, they'll use it at times of stress.  Splint to Phase II   [0:16:12]  Now let's talk about phase two options. So splint to phase two. Our goal with phase two is  to take them from this blueprinted position to the final position. The splint is our blueprint.  We already know it works. We know that's our vertical. We know that's our AP. We know  that's our occlusal scheme. That's what we've done with the splint. There are no question  marks here anymore when we're going into phase two except one. And that one could be  the vertical. Now be careful with this, but I know this from personal experience and my  mentor did this all the time, is we would have someone in a lower appliance and they'd  wear an upper at night, but we'd have them in that appliance and sometimes it's a little tall  in the back. And sometimes that resulted in a little anterior open bite, so to speak, on the  splint. So there was no material covering their front teeth on the splint, but they didn't have  anterior coupling. And what he would typically do is we would use the splint to guide us on  that occlusal position, on that AP position. And then once he got it back from the lab with  the preps and everything, he would just lower the occlusal pin until those front teeth  touched. I didn't love that feeling that that gave me because I'm like, wait a second, didn't  we just spend all this time finding out the magic spot for their teeth to be in and now you  just changed it by two millimeters of vertical. So I didn't necessarily question him on that,  but it did plant a seed in my mind of like, hmm, you sure that we need these crowns? Be -  cause why is it that we aren't going exactly where we did with the splint? Why is it possible  that we can get away with having their actual teeth, once we've restored their teeth, lower  vertical than the splint? That kind of didn't make sense to me.  [0:18:20]  And one of the reasons that we think we can wean people off is because most people, if  you get them to this stage, they're not spending a lot of time with their teeth together, so  they can tolerate that difference in vertical if they've learned to be one percent occluders.  So preferably, I would try, and this is why when I talked to you about the wax bite, right, I'm  like, evaluate it from right there. So remember in the case I showed, and you can go back  and look at that, but that case, you're looking at that and you're like, could I restore her  here? And the answer is yes. Could I do orthodontics here? Yeah, no problem. You want to  be looking at that from the get-go of how would this work? Is this restorable?  Orthodontics   [0:19:02]  09 /01/25   Page   of 6   16

SSC 2.0 - 308: Phase Two Therapy & TMD with OSA  Okay, all right, so here's our options. With orthodontics, we would remove the second mo -  lars from the splint, add composite buildup, and maybe turbos. Now there may be, not  maybe, there are definitely other ways to do this, but this should just kind of teach the prin -  ciple of how to do this. So imagine your mind's eye, we've got our splint there, and all  we're going to do is we're going to cut off that second molar of the splint, leave the splint in  there, put in some composite, ideally like a blue composite so it's easy to take off later. So  put on some colored composite onto the second molar, and then when they tap into the  splint, that composite is going to go hit their upper second molars, and there's your stop.  So that's going to be exactly the same AP and vertical as your splint. Then the turbos  would just give them more places to touch, because when you take that splint out, they're  only going to hit here, so they might need the turbos on the back of their upper front teeth  to have anterior hitting on the front teeth. Now believe it or not though, lots of people that  we did this on, and they usually didn't need that, so they would just hit at two spots on the  back and they would be fine. So that also made me question the whole occlusal even the -  ory. You know, why was it, so my mentor was a gnathologist, right? He was all about how  the teeth came together and all that stuff, and we'd use the different color of articulating  paper, and we would take people through excursive motions and all that stuff, right?  [0:20:41]  And then all of a sudden, you could have people only hitting on two teeth in their head ba -  sically, well not basically, that's it, so they just hit on their second molars, that's all, and  they wouldn't have their symptoms come back. So maybe it was that AP, maybe it was the  vertical, maybe it was that they'd learned, lips together, teeth apart, not sure, but it certain -  ly had nothing to do with their canine guidance, it certainly had nothing to do with their mu -  tually protected occlusion and all this other stuff that I've been taught, none of that was at  play at all. So interesting, right? But this works, and this worked all the time. Now where  this doesn't work, this is important, is you just send the person to the orthodontist and  you're like, all right, here's where they're comfortable, go ahead and put them there. No  way, the orthodontist takes the splint out day one, throws it in the trash, starts pulling them  together, but as soon as they do, the pressure goes back to here and then they have a  problem again, like inevitably. So do this little step here to make sure that that vertical and  AP that you've established as being effective is the spot that their jaw is.  The Farrar-Style Night Guard (Forever)   [0:21:54]  The Farrar-style night guard you're going to do after orthodontics is complete. So once  their teeth are all together, okay, all the teeth come together, still got our composites back  here, right? So we take off the composites and the last thing they do is pull the second mo -  lars together. Once that's all done, then the upper retainer should have that little Farrar-  style ramp on it to keep their jaw from falling backwards when their teeth are together,  09 /01/25   Page   of 7   16

SSC 2.0 - 308: Phase Two Therapy & TMD with OSA  right? So just to reinforce that occlusal position when they swallow while they sleep. Or if  you used a sleep style appliance, so a mandibular stabilization appliance keeps your jaw  from falling backwards, then you would make that after orthodontics. Again, not trying to  bring their jaw forward, we want to establish that occlusion long term, but if you have an  appliance that keeps your jaw from falling backwards, that's what you would use forever.  Restorative   [0:22:45]  What about phase two restorative? So with phase two restorative, a couple ways you can  do this. You could section the splint and do one side, then the other and typically that'd be  like one day, so what I used to do is I would section the splint, so I would prep all their  teeth on one side, and then I would use the splint on the other side to make their tempo -  raries on that side, okay, in the posterior usually. And then I would have that as my stop,  be able to take the splint away, and now the splint's gone, okay, as I had to cut it in half for  the step one to get that bite. And now the splint's out of there. So I use these temps that I  already made, prep, then I can make the temps at the same vertical and AP as the other  side. That's one way to do it. Another way to do it is you do the anteriors first and keep the  splint in. That works. Or you can make an anterior jig. And we would usually kind of do a  mixture of these with the anterior jig. Think back to the morning reprogrammer with sleep  appliance, that's an anterior jig. So what we do in this case is we take the splint, trim off a  whole bunch of that anterior aspect of it, or at this stage of the game, if you're about to do  crowns, you're about to do preps, you could completely cut out, you could just have seg -  ments of the splint on each side, nothing in the anterior.  [0:24:11]  You could use that same ThermAcryl Plus that you use for the morning reprogrammer, or  we would use Duralay, okay, and if that, I'm pretty sure that still exists. So you could use  Duralay, which is gonna be hard acrylic versus the softer, if you will, ThermAcryl Plus. Ei -  ther would work fine, but you're just gonna put something in there that's not going to shrink  or change on their teeth, put that in there, they close down onto the splint, you've got this  anterior key now, and then with that anterior key in, you would prep all of the posterior  teeth, make your temporaries, okay, then you would get rid of the jig, prep their anterior  teeth, and now you've got that bite because you already did the posterior teeth. Okay, not  rocket science, it's a lot of work. If you haven't done something like that before, it is defi -  nitely a lot of work, but your key is I want to make gosh darn sure that I'm in the same spot  that we've already proven with phase two.  [0:25:06]  Do not have your perfect blueprint and then just build whatever the flip house you want  and just decide, you know hat, actually I don't want that wall there, I don't want that sup -  port beam there, I don't want that as you're building it. The house is going to collapse.  Stick with what you've already proven works and then just go from there to the restora -  09 /01/25   Page   of 8   16

SSC 2.0 - 308: Phase Two Therapy & TMD with OSA  tions. That makes all the sense in the world. It is not that difficult to do that. I've mentioned  this as well that if you are doing full mouth reconstruction with how nice temporaries can  be nowadays, I would strongly encourage that you go from the splint to some beautiful  temporaries, let them use those for a while, kind of dial in the occlusion on those, and then  you can do a final scan of those, get a bite with those in, send that to the laboratory for the  final gorgeous restorations, and then when those should theoretically just drop in and the  patient's like, ah, that's awesome, okay, as you will have figured it out in advance. And  then that way too, you don't have to grind on the kind of perfect final restorations because  as you know, getting them perfectly smooth is sometimes easier said than done, so it'd be  nice to use the temporaries to get everything dialed in really nicely. The patient feels good,  they're eating well, speaking well, everything's awesome on that, and then you take those  to go to the final restorations.  Night Guards ARE Forever!   [0:26:34]  Night guards are forever, okay? How long? Forever. What did I tell you before? The Dr.  Mathis patients, they came back and they had either lost their night guard or stopped  wearing it for some reason, and we made them a new night guard and then they were fine.  And these are people that did have phase two, that was Dr. Mathis's paradigm was splint  therapy to phase two. And they started having problems if they stopped using their night  guard. Now I think that for a lot of those people, that was because their Farrar-style night  guard did a decent job of protecting their airway. When would it protect their airway? When  their teeth were together, that's it. But it didn't hurt their airway per se when their teeth are  not together, but I think these are people kind of, actually I don't think these are people, I  know that these are people that were spending more time with their teeth together. Other -  wise, it wouldn't have mattered if they didn't have a night guard.  [0:27:27]  Okay, if your teeth are apart all night long, or you're a 1% occluder and you're only putting  your teeth together 1.3 minutes a night, what difference is a night guard gonna make?  Zero. So these were probably people that are more 10% occluders, 15, 20% occluders,  and having that positioning of that Farrar-style night guard when they sleep, or using an  appliance that keeps their jaw from falling backwards when they sleep, that's going to al -  low better muscle relaxation, it's going to allow better airway protection, which is going to  ideally give them better sleep, it's going to take the pressure off their jaw joints, all that  kind of stuff, again, in someone who is not a 1% occluder. If they're a 1% occluder, they're  probably not going to need this, but a lot of 1% occluders never went down this road in the  first place because they didn't need to. Remember, it's not necessarily what you have, it's  what you do with what you have. So a lot of these people that are our patients that we've  spent the last multiple hours talking about are people that aren't good at lips together,  teeth apart. They aren't our 1% occluders. That's why they're in this position in the first  09 /01/25   Page   of 9   16

SSC 2.0 - 308: Phase Two Therapy & TMD with OSA  place. The closer we can get them to 1% occluders, the less likely they're going to need  the night guard forever and stuff like that.  [0:28:42]  However, we're going to tell all of our patients that they do need that, and it's going to act  as a retainer, it's going to encourage that consistency of the occlusion, it's going to be a  reprogrammer, it's going to program that occlusion in. By the way, that's where we make it.  So once you've done phase two, you're not changing their occlusion. So that phase two  occlusion, that would be where the night guard is made. If you used a Farrar-style night  guard or you used a stabilization sleep style of appliance, you just want them there. You  don't want them forward of there. You don't want them anything like that. That's where,  again, this can get a little confusing for people with the Farrar-style night guard with the  ramp. It's like, oh, that's an anterior reposition appliance. It doesn't need to be. And that  does not need to reposition the mandible forward if it's just made in their normal occlusal  position, their habitual occlusal position, which you have dictated through phase one being  successful and now phase two. That's where we're making our night guard that they're go -  ing to use forever so that it just reinforces every time they sleep, every time they swallow  when they sleep, reinforces, ah, yep, this is where my jaw is supposed to go. That's why  night guards are forever.  Treating TMD & OSA   [0:29:53]  Now let's talk about treating temporomandibular disorders and sleep apnea simultaneous -  ly. Now this gets scary, right? Ooh, TMD and OSA. Now according to the FDA, you can't  even treat someone who has a TMJ problem with a sleep appliance, but that is total  malarkey. Now you know that treating someone's OSA can make their TMJ problem get  better. We have good evidence of that and there's a lot of our patients that come in with a  TMJ problem as their chief complaint. We talk to them about possible airway problem. We  talk to them about that possibly being covered by their insurance if we go down the ob -  structive sleep apnea road. They say, yeah, that sounds great. And they go down that  road. They get treated for their obstructive sleep apnea, including with CPAP sometimes,  and their TMJ problem gets better. So we all know that. We don't need to be scared of  that.  [0:30:48]  Now, I've already talked about this again, but to reinforce this, if their chief complaint is  TMD, please don't lose their confidence by only talking about sleep. Talk about sleep. Ex -  plain to them that this could be the underlying etiology of their problem. But if they're kind  of like, they're just not like, oh, what? Seriously? Like that could be it? Oh my gosh, let's go  down that road. That sounds amazing. Usually when they're in pain, they're only con -  cerned about their pain. And the idea of, well, I got to get this and I got to go to that doctor.  And then who knows how long this is going to take and blah, blah, blah. That might really  09 /01/25   Page   of 10   16

SSC 2.0 - 308: Phase Two Therapy & TMD with OSA  turn them off and they'll end up going to someone else in town. So address the TMJ prob -  lem and let them know, hey, we can treat your TMJ problem and we can treat you like now.  We can get you into treatment almost immediately. And here's all the stuff we're going to  do. But at some point in the future, I want to kind of take a couple steps back and look at  this possible underlying etiology of sleep apnea.  [0:31:53]  Because if your TMJ problem is related to an airway issue, what do you think your brain  cares more about, a TMJ problem or air? TMJ problem or breathing? Probably breathing,  right? So if we ignore that and that gets worse or it's just not addressed, then it's possible  that you could have this problem just be perpetuated. So let's treat your TMJ problem, get  you out of pain, get this kind of stabilized. But then I think we back up and we look at this  so we don't ignore this potential underlying etiology. Does that sound fair to you? Yeah,  cool. Now you give them a choice, right? So give them a choice. Don't ignore the TMD be -  cause you're like all about the airway. And a lot of you will do that. You'd be like, hey, I bet  this is an airway issue. A lot of TMJ problems are actually airway issues. I've heard Jami -  son Spencer say that. My mentor said that. They want the TMJ treatment because that's  why they're there. They're in your office for a TMJ therapy. You bringing up the sleep ap -  nea stuff is complete disconnect. So you have to make sure they understand why you're  talking about that.   You are talking about that because you think that could be the underly -  ing cause of their problem and that it would be inappropriate for you to ignore the underly -  ing cause and just kind of treat this thing that's happening to them. They'll appreciate that.  And you will have some people that are like, you know what, this sucks. I hate it, but I'm  okay. I'm dealing with it. And if you're telling me that it could be the sleep apnea stuff and  that that's going to be covered by my insurance if I go down that road, I'm willing to deal  with this a little longer while we go down that road. Awesome. Then they know. They know  you can help them. They know that you're doing something to save them some money.  They'll appreciate that.  If a Day Splint is Indicated..   [0:33:39]  Okay. Now, let's say that we're going to treat them with a sleep appliance. We know they  have obstructive sleep apnea and we're going to treat their TMJ problem during the day.  So if a day splint's indicated, then fit with a separate day splint or an appliance like an EMA  could be made and that lower part could be the day splint. And this is something kind of  cool. This saves you and the patient some money, but with an EMA, so we've got our little  posterior pads, right? The reason for the posterior pads is just so you can change the ver -  tical more easily. But those posterior pads don't need to be on the bottom. It does not mat -  ter one iota if they're on the bottom or the top. So you could very easily put the pads on the  top and have the lower be that CR or CO directive splint with occlusion. Got all the bumps  in there. The only difference between that lower and a typical EMA lower is the occlusion is  09 /01/25   Page   of 11   16

SSC 2.0 - 308: Phase Two Therapy & TMD with OSA  going to be in there with a splint. And the only difference between a typical day splint and  this version that is the lower part of an EMA is there's going to be buttons on the lower part  of the EMA, obviously, in order to put the bands on. And you tell the patient in advance  like, hey, why don't we try this and this could save you some money. This is very little extra  work for us to do to put this bite in here for this lower crutches appliance we need to give  you. But these little bumps on it, because we need you to wear this during the day.  [0:35:09]  We need you to use the crutches when your jaw is being used. That might bother you, and  if it bothers you, you just let us know, and we can make you another one. It's going to be X  dollars, right? And most of your patients will appreciate that, that, hey, I'm doing this step  to kind of save you some bucks, but if it annoys you, then it's going to be more important  that you have something you can actually wear, and that will cost whatever, okay? So the  idea here is lower splint, be that either part of their sleep appliance or not, and then that's  what they wear during the day, and then at nighttime, they're wearing the appliance that  keeps their jaw from falling backwards for their obstructive sleep apnea. So that's how you  treat the TMD problem and the obstructive sleep apnea simultaneously. What if you're do -  ing PRF? Awesome. So no difference there with the appliances. Just going to be fabulous  and even better, because you're going to use the PRF. They're going to get better quicker.  Everything's going to be more awesome with the PRF. You're going to be able to wean  them off of the day splint quicker, like I've said before.  Proceed with Caution   [0:36:11]  Now, a little cautionary note here. If we're using the sleep appliance that's keeping the jaw  from falling backwards, and perhaps even bringing them forward, yes? So we don't always  just get away with keeping the jaw from falling backwards. Sometimes we need to protrude  the jaw a bit. Okay, maybe it's edge to edge. Of course, it's going to depend on their over -  jet, but you get what I'm saying here. They might be a little bit past edge to edge in order  to protect their airway. Protecting the airway is the most important thing, right? So remem -  ber, if they're still snoring, not feeling well, full steam ahead. So we might be taking them at  nighttime in a different jaw position than they're in during the day. A typical TMD case, it's  the same position, isn't it? The day splint and the night guard are the same position. In this  scenario, they may not be. They might be, but they may not be. If you're having to hold  them in a more anterior position to sleep, and then their day splint's there during the day,  the big difference here between some of this just being treated for sleep or some of this  just being treated for TMD is with just sleep, we're doing everything we can to get them  back to their normal bite during the day, yes?  [0:37:27]  So we've got a morning reprogrammer. We're trying to get them back to their normal bite.  Hopefully by lunchtime, they're back to their normal bite, yes? With a splint therapy per -  09 /01/25   Page   of 12   16

SSC 2.0 - 308: Phase Two Therapy & TMD with OSA  son, we're having them wear a day splint, an upper night guard, but what are they doing  with it when they eat? Well, if they don't have pain when they eat, they're taking it out to  eat. So with that person too, they have typically occlusal contacts when they eat and swal -  low. So we're not taking away their normal occlusion 24 hours a day. We're just taking it  away part-time and teaching them that lips together, teeth apart. In this scenario, that  could also be the case. So the same rules apply here. If they don't have pain when they  eat, then they don't need to wear it to eat. And this person is less likely that they would  need phase two than someone who did have to wear it when they eat. So bottom line  though, is just be a little bit more cautious in these cases because a Farrar-style night  guard is not holding their jaw forward. Please, please make sure you're clear on that.  They're not holding their teeth against the thing all night long, so they can relax.  [0:38:38]  Okay, they're in REM sleep. Their muscles are all relaxed. If they're on their back, their  jaw's back with a Farrar-style night guard. Farrar-style night guard is only working when  their teeth come together. A sleep appliance, on the other hand, is holding the jaw all the  time. Regardless of teeth together or not, it's holding their jaw from falling backwards. It's  holding their jaw a little forward. That is wildly different than a Farrar-style night guard. And  as such, the need for phase two may be increased. We still don't see a lot of people need -  ing phase two. We really don't. Nevertheless, please inform people that they might. I never  want you to have a patient that needs phase two that's surprised. I never want that to hap -  pen to you. I only want you to have patients where you're like, you know what? Here's  what I think we're going to need to do. And the patient's like, yeah, that's what I figured. So  I figured we need to do. So I can't go without this thing. Okay, my jaw just doesn't feel  good when I try to go back to where my bite used to hit. That's what I want you to have  your experience be. Not, what are you talking about? I have to have what? I have to have  $8,000 worth of crowns? Or excuse me, I have to have $8,000 worth of braces? I'm 50  years old. I'm going to braces? You know, those were 12-year-olds, not 50-year-olds. I  don't want someone upset at you like that. What? I got to have $35,000 worth of crowns? I  have to have $50,000 worth of crowns? What are you talking about? Hey, remember  back? So you have this conversation in advance. Make sure they understand this. And  then you won't have those types of things.  If They Have TMD Symptoms   [0:40:13]  As mentioned, if they have TMD symptoms, they're using the day splint, then we're going  to wean them off like normal. And then just the normal weaning protocol, including that  they might wear the day splint at times of stress or when they feel like it. And then lastly, if  the patient's able to wean from the day splint, then what's their night guard? What's the  forever night guard? Well, their sleep appliance. So in that scenario, you just have some -  one that wears a sleep appliance and maybe their day splint at times of stress. So that is  09 /01/25   Page   of 13   16

SSC 2.0 - 308: Phase Two Therapy & TMD with OSA  going to happen way more often than not. I would say 99% of the time where normal splint  therapy, it's 99.9% of the time. In this case with the sleep appliance, just because it's more  active, it's doing something at nighttime instead of passively hanging out, it's going to in -  crease the chance of phase two, but still odds are good that they're not going to need  phase two. Cannot stress more about patient education. Use the TMJ demonstrator. Get  good at using this. Help people understand. Because one more time, when you are bring -  ing them, when you do need phase two, it's not bad. So there are lots of people out there  that teach old bite bad, new bite good. And they're not wrong. The new bite is in a better  physiological anatomical position. It is where their muscles and joints and everything wants  to be. It is good. Just not everyone needs to go there. Because where we can get away  with them not going into this better, admittedly better position, is one percent occlusion.  See, I can hold my jaw. Where I hold my jaw is an ideal position for my jaw. Where my  teeth go is not. Where my teeth fit drives my condyle back and up. Gives me a disc dis -  placement. But I don't spend any time there.  [0:42:18]  So crowning my teeth to a different position wouldn't matter to me. It wouldn't bother me. I  would be fine if I did that. I would tolerate that well is what I mean by that. But it really  wouldn't change anything for me because I spend no time there in the first place. Okay?  Educate the patient that if we do need to go down phase two, it's not bad. Because typical -  ly with things like this, like we're thinking of some surgery or whatever, like they do the  conservative thing, and then when do they do more? Well, they do more when the conser -  vative thing doesn't work like they'd hoped it would. That's when they're doing more. That's  not what we're doing here. We're only doing the more when the lesser has worked awe -  some, but they just for whatever reason can't go back to that original position where they  had pain to begin with. That is so much easier for people to understand that like, hey,  when you first came in, this is where you were, or this is where you are now, and you've  got a problem.  [0:43:21]  So we're going to try to kind of take care of this. And if you are able to learn lips together,  teeth apart, if you are able to spend very little time with your teeth here, you should do  great. On the other hand, if you're not able to learn lips together, teeth apart, if you are  somebody that spends a lot of time with their teeth together, and you just really can't con -  trol that, you try as hard as you can, but you really can't control that, then we might need to  change your bite. Those are the people that when you get there and have that discussion,  they'll be like, yep, you called it. I'm that kind of person. I'm spending a lot of time with my  teeth together. I get it. Boy, this sure feels good though, where you've kind of set me up  here. Let's go ahead and make that permanent. And even then, I notice in my little dia -  logue that I just made up there is the patient that said, let's make that permanent. I'd be  careful using that term.  [0:44:08]  As a matter of fact, I would say to the patient that, hey, by the way, even if you go through  orthodontics or we crown your teeth, I need to make you aware that one day down the  09 /01/25   Page   of 14   16

SSC 2.0 - 308: Phase Two Therapy & TMD with OSA  road, you could bite down on a peanut in a salad, and this could all start over again. You  could, heaven forbid, get rear-ended on the freeway, and that causes a problem again.  You could get hit in the jaw. You could be having your grandchild bouncing, your grand -  child on your lap, and she swings her head back and smacks you in the chin, and you've  got a jaw problem again. So doing this is going to give you the best chance of long-term  success, but it doesn't make you impervious to further breakdown, destruction, or injury.  Okay? Does that make sense? So don't think that way either, that we make these  changes, and all of a sudden it's like, oh, yeah, we're perfect now for the rest of our life.  Not necessarily. Stuff can happen.  Remember.. It’s All About the Diagnosis   [0:45:08]  Lastly, remember, it's all about the diagnosis. Early microscopes. It's a mammoth. I love  that far side. If your diagnosis is wrong, it's rare that your treatment will be right. Happens.  It does happen. People will give dentists right now, right this second, some dentist some -  where is giving someone a night guard, and that person might get better, and the dentist  will have no idea why. Now, in the dentist's brain, it's because that person's clenching and  grinding their teeth or whatever, and maybe they are, but the patient will get better, and the  dentist really won't know that they have a thought of what the diagnosis is, and that could  have, frankly, nothing to do with what the true diagnosis was. When in doubt, rule it out.  When in doubt, dig a little deeper. When in doubt, ask your peers. In Spencer Study Club,  we have hundreds, if not thousands, of years of experience. I mean, my practices alone  have treated tens of thousands of patients. Add now hundreds of Spencer Study Club  members and thousands of Spencer Study Club members over the years and all those  Facebook posts and all that kind of stuff. We've seen your case. We've seen that case that  is giving you problems. Ask. Figure stuff out. Refine your diagnosis. Take action on your  diagnosis. Work with the patient. Don't give up. Don't make it all about the plastic. You're  going to be successful. You can treat these patients.  [0:46:44]  Jump in, okay? You don't need to know everything before you do anything, okay? You just  need to start helping people. Now, don't necessarily take the super complicated ones first.  There's probably a Spencer Study Club member near you, maybe someone at a practice  like mine that's super limited. This is all they do when you have a case, maybe even the  reducing disc displacement that has a lot of pain, but they also got some headaches and  they got some other stuff going on, and there's possible sleep apnea, that may not be the  first one for you to try. On the other hand, someone with reducing disc displacement with  just some muscle pain, but it's relatively mild, and it's a real distinct click, and you know  that you can capture that with splint therapy, that person's gonna get better. That person  has a dislocated shoulder, you're gonna put their shoulder back into place, everything's  gonna start feeling better. So use these videos to help you determine the patient that you  09 /01/25   Page   of 15   16

SSC 2.0 - 308: Phase Two Therapy & TMD with OSA  can handle at first and jump in. Who else is gonna help them? Probably nobody. Now, in  coming videos, it's about the unlocking procedures and things like that, and I really want  you to learn that, and really, really, really important, learn how to do PRF. Frankly, PRF is  gonna make you so much better because it's all about harnessing the body's power to heal  itself and becomes less about you, less about your skill at using splint therapy, less about  your skill in diagnosis even, as long as you get that initial diagnosis right of that's where  the pain is. That's where the pain is. That's where the pain is. That's where the pain is. We  put PRF in there, the body's gonna do its job, and you'll just be like, whoa, right on. That  person got better. They will be blown away by you. PRF is the most important thing you  can be doing for these patients. The splint therapy is crutches. Our diagnosis has to be  right, but once you put these principles into place, if your diagnosis is correct, they will get  better. It will be predictable. They're gonna wean off almost always. Some won't. We're go -  ing to prepare for that. You can do it. You got this. Take care.  [outro music]  09 /01/25   Page   of 16   16

