SSC 2.0 - 309: Retrodiscitis Part 1  SSC 2.0   Level 3  309: Retrodiscitis Part 1  [intro music]  Retrodiscitis of the TM Joint Overview   [0:00:12]  Welcome to Retrodiscitis of the Temporomandibular Joint. Now, this is likely the most  common painful problem that you're going to see in your sleep and TMD practice is a  Retrodiscitis. And understanding what's going on here is really key to not only helping  these patients, but really wrapping your brain around what's going on in the joint. This re -  lates to posterior open bite cases. It relates to why it takes people a while to get their bite  to go back together. All of this, I believe, is related to retrodiscitis. And when we put that itis  on there, that obviously means inflammation. And it is not always inflammation per se. It  can be just a fluid in the joint capsule, but it's going to be similar in how that behaves to a  retrodiscitis. This is very common, and once you understand this, you're going to see it as  common.  [0:01:15]  Now, I just said a second ago that this is the most common painful problem that you're  gonna see. Probably you will see more internal derangement, popping, clicking, things like  that, but those aren't necessarily painful. As a matter of fact, most of the time they aren't  painful. So you will see theoretically more once you're looking for them, you'll see more  people with popping and clicking jaws. It'd be relatively rare for you to go a day in your  practice and not have somebody with a reducing disc displacement. So you'll recognize  that more now that you've learned about it. But as far as painful joint problems go,  retrodiscitis is gonna be right up there. With the vast majority of TMJ problem cases that  you see are likely going to be a retrodiscitis. A close second for this is temporal tendon.  So we're going to differentiate those. And as you go through these different sections here  you'll get really clear on what is what and how to differentially diagnose these problems.  TMJ Capsule   [0:02:25]  So we have here our TMJ capsule. And a capsule is that whole ball, if you will, around the  condyle. So within the TMJ capsule, so we have here a cutaway of that TMJ capsule, like  sliced down basically the outside, taking that off so we can look through our window there  into the capsule. So starting from the back here, we have our posterior attachment. This is  the capsule attached to the temporal bone. And then of course it's going to be attached  down here to the condyle.  09/01/25   Page   of 1   15

SSC 2.0 - 309: Retrodiscitis Part 1  [0:02:59]  To the front, we're going to have our anterior attachment to typically the articular emi -  nence. And you note that that's at the very bottom of the articular eminence. So when  someone's actually opening, I have a video here in a second that you've seen a thousand  times, when somebody opens and goes past the articular eminence, they are potentially  going beyond that range of that capsule. The end point of the capsule for most people is  going to be right around that end of the articular eminence. Us going past our articular em -  inence is not really what the design is for. We go to the bottom of the articular eminence  and that should be full opening. Some people are hypermobile, loosey-goosey in their  joint, and they'll go past that. And that typically means that that entire capsule, the liga -  mentous structures of the capsule, are pretty much stretched out. And that allows them to  do that. Again, they're loosey-goosey in most of their joints, not just their jaw joint. It's rela -  tively rare to have somebody with really wide opening of their jaw, but everything else is  really stiff. Usually you're not going to see that. Now we've got again our cutaway here of  the capsule.  [0:04:13]  So looking inside the capsule, we have our retrodiscal tissues. The retrodiscal tissues are,  as the name implies, behind the disk. And the retrodiscal tissues are full of blood vessels  and nerves. Our disk, on the other hand, is avascular. So the disk has no blood vessels,  no nerves. So the way this is designed here is we have our head of our condyle putting  pressure across a avascular disk onto a tubercle of bone. The articular eminence or articu -  lar tubercle is a big old thick bump of bone. And that all makes sense. So that's where our  pressure is going to go. Now, I covered this back in level one in the anatomy, but to repeat  this here, the very superior aspect of the fossa, that is the lamina papyracea of the tempo -  ral bone. It is basically one layer thick. If you have a dry skull, you can put that to the light  and you're going to see light through that area. It is wicked thin. So do you think that the  condyle should go most superior? Do you think that's how the design is made? Is that  we're going to take that condyle as far superior as possible up against a one cell layer  thick of bone?  [0:05:31]  Or would it make more sense for it to be down and forward, so to speak, from most supe -  rior to put that pressure against the articular eminence, the big thick part of bone? So re -  member when we define centric relation, even though the definition will say anterior supe -  rior, remember that that's only, it's only so superior as to have the disc have enough room  to be in place. And you note again here on this condyle, if we take a line from the top of  the condyle and kind of stick it through the eminence there, that condyle at, we would as -  sume here in the habitually closed position, the habitual contact position, the condyle is  halfway down the articular eminence at rest, at that max menarche position, not way the  heck up in the fossa. If we were to take that condyle and jam it up superiorly, what's going  to happen to the disc? Well, the disc has to go off, doesn't it? If the disc goes off, what  happens to the retrodiscal tissue? Well, it gets pulled over the condyle, the head of the  condyle. And now all of a sudden we have a situation where the pressures of chewing and  09/01/25   Page   of 2   15

SSC 2.0 - 309: Retrodiscitis Part 1  clenching and grinding and stuff like that are going on the retrodiscal tissue instead of the  disc.  [0:06:54]  And that's where we get into trouble. Okay. Now, I used to teach this, I think in level one  actually, from the original SSC 1.0 videos, I probably called it capsulitis. And I was taught  by my mentors capsulitis and lots of people will still say capsulitis. And then I learned a few  years ago that it actually wasn't a capsulitis. So the capsule, if the capsule and think of the  capsule as the outside aspect of it, if the capsule was inflamed, then pulling on the jaw,  opening wide would still hurt, but it would be kind of more of a distraction of the joint would  hurt more. You're stretching out that capsule. Whereas a retrodiscitis is a inflammation of  the retrodiscal tissues. That's typically more what we're dealing with. Now, if you had  somebody who had a capsulitis and you're like, I'm not, I'm not positive if it's a capsulitis or  retrodiscitis, I'll take you through how we define retrodiscitis. Treatment wise, you're pretty  much going to treat it the same way. So it wouldn't hurt anybody if you're like, well, I think  this is a retrodiscitis. I'm not positive. I'm kind of on the fence here. There's a few things  that didn't make sense.  [0:08:08]  You know, their teeth are coming together all the way and things like that. That's not typical  of a retrodiscitis. I'm going to treat them the same way though. It's a retrodiscitis. They're  going to do fine because you're going to be treating the same area and the body's not go -  ing to, you know, take it, take offense that you're like, well, I'm actually thinking I'm doing  this for retrodiscitis and the body's like, yeah, but it's actually a capsulitis. Okay. Don't wor -  ry about that. But our vernacular to be correct is retrodiscitis. When we believe it's the  retrodiscal tissue that have the itis that have the inflammation.  [video playback]  Going back to our joint videos, I just discussed a second ago, the reducing disc displace -  ment, and I'm going to go ahead and stop all the videos here. And so that you can see this  anatomy without all of the motion for a second, we can start the motion here again in a  minute.  Normal Joint   [0:09:05]  But once again, look at that normal joint, this condyle in the normal joint, the head of the,  or the top of the condyle is actually the bottom of the articular eminence in the habitual oc -  clusion position. Yeah. And then when the person opens, then it goes all the way down to  the edge of the articular eminence. We can kind of see the anterior attachment of the cap -  sules right about there. Our posterior attachment on the neck of the condyle is right there.  We can't see the posterior attachment on here. The disc is this fat, skinny, fat part. You can  see from this section of the disc that it doesn't look like there's anything inside it. And that's  because there's nothing inside it. So there's no blood vessels, there's no nerves, no little  09/01/25   Page   of 3   15

SSC 2.0 - 309: Retrodiscitis Part 1  holes there for those things. Whereas this tissue back here, the retrodiscal tissue, when  that kind of stretches out, it looks vascular. This tissue is not meant to have a bunch of  pressure. This tissue in between the condyle and the big, big bump of bone of the articular  eminence, that is what our goal is.  Reducing Disc Displacement   [0:10:15]  When we move over to our reducing disc displacement, we've got the disc in front. And  then what are we on back here? Well, that's the retrodiscal tissue. Because the disc is an -  teriorly displaced, the retrodiscal tissue had to go with it until we get down here where the  tissue's gone. But at the beginning stages here, the retrodiscal tissue goes with the disc.  The disc has no room. Top of the condyle, top of the fossa, top of the condyle, top of the  fossa, top of the condyle, top of the fossa. We don't have any room for the disc there, so  the disc is displaced. The person is functioning, for the most part, on their retrodiscal tis -  sue. Any type of swallowing, putting the teeth all the way together, is going to be on that  retrodiscal tissue. Now when they're open a little bit, have like meat between their teeth or  stuff like that, the condyle is going to come down here. But if I start rolling that, they can  come down a ways before they pop into place. Once they pop into place, now everything's  working normally, but when the teeth come together, boop, off of the tissue again, or off  the disc again, onto the retrodiscal tissue. Now you may think to yourself, well, wouldn't  everybody with a reducing disc displacement have retrodiscitis almost by definition? Well,  not necessarily. Those tissues can get used to it, and a lot of people, like I mentioned at  the beginning here, reducing disc displacements, they're not necessarily coming in saying,  ow, ow, you know, look, my jaw clicks and every time it does, it hurts.  [0:11:47]  As a matter of fact, when I teach this, you may have seen this live in person, when some -  body goes and they go pop, that's when the people sitting around them in my lectures go,  oh no, right? So they kind of freak out to the pop. And what should be going on here is not  the pop into place, kind of like, oh no, that should be like, yay, where we should go, oh no,  is right there. Now we've come off of the disc onto that retrodiscal tissue. And if they do  that hard enough, then yeah, that can cause that retrodiscitis.  Non-Reducing Disc Displacement   [0:12:23]  Okay, now to kind of stop those again, with our non-reducing disc displacement, once  again, we are on that retrodiscal tissue. Here we have the disc in front, it's all squashed  out in front. The condyle is way up here, there's no room for the disc. And in that case, the  disc never comes into place, it doesn't reduce anymore, it doesn't pop. And we just have  that being kind of stretched out. And you see a good view of this retrodiscal tissue here on  09/01/25   Page   of 4   15

SSC 2.0 - 309: Retrodiscitis Part 1  that, you know, here as well when we open, here as well. Again, that kind of looks all vas -  cular and stuff, doesn't it? Whereas the disc itself is, you know, nice and solid, whereas the  retrodiscal tissue just, you know, it little looks vascular. We don't have elastic fibers back  here, we don't have any muscles pulling this tissue back, it's all at the mercy of the condyle  coming back and forth. And in a normal joint, a retrusive hit, which we'll talk about next,  could cause a retrodiscitis, not necessarily getting them off the disc, but if you just got hit in  the jaw hard enough, that condyle is going to pop those tissues. And in the normal joint,  those tissues have never had pressure put on them, so it doesn't take much to put pres -  sure on them to then hurt it. In our reducing disc displacement, it's on that tissue all the  time. In our non-reducing disc displacement, it's on that tissue all the time. So consider  that, that this is one of the reasons that those conditions don't typically hurt. They would if  they were acute, and it's going to be relatively rare that you see an acute reducing disc  displacement, but if you did, if you ever had somebody, it's like, my jaw just barely started  clicking, that's probably going to hurt, because it's new, the disc is displaced, it's pinching  on that tissue, they're going to exhibit a retrodiscitis, and it's going to  [0:14:21]  Hurt, but that will be relatively rare. You will typically see people that have had their pop -  ping and clicking for quite some time, or they're not popping and clicking for a bit of time.  When people come in with a non-reducing disc displacement, we'll cover this when we talk  about unlocking procedures and non-reducing disc displacements, it's rarely pain that is  their chief complaint, they're freaked out. So their jaw used to open and finally pop, and  they could open fully and eat whatever they wanted to, and now all of a sudden they can't  open all the way. So it's that restricted motion that they're freaked out about, it's not that  they're on this tissue differently. Now when they try to open, they do stretch out their  retrodiscal tissue, so again watching the non-reducing disc displacement here, when the  person opens, now if it's been like that for a long time, there's not much stretch there, but  as you will kind of keep watching that there, they will eventually in the video take the  condyle and pull it way the heck forward, and that stretches out. In someone who has  more of an acute non-reducing disc displacement, they won't have stretched it out  [0:15:21]  Yet, and so just their normal opening kind of hurts. This is one of the reasons when we get  to that point, I'll talk about giving a local anesthetic injection into the jaw joint for our un -  locking procedure, and as of 2025, we always use local anesthetic, even though we're do -  ing lots of PRF now, we save PRF for after the unlocking procedure, we use the anesthetic  for the unlocking procedure because of that numbness. So that is all of the disc displace -  ments, the normal, really got to understand this, right? And so as you're doing this with  sleep apnea too, just think that the person that is here on the reducing disc displacement,  you've brought them onto the disc all night long, all of a sudden they're on the disc all night  long, you're actually giving that retrodiscal tissue a chance to heal. They haven't been off  of the retrodiscal tissue for six, seven, eight hours in a row for possibly decades, right?  And now all of a sudden they are, and that can allow that tissue to heal up a bit and be  09/01/25   Page   of 5   15

SSC 2.0 - 309: Retrodiscitis Part 1  then more prone to being hurt because it's not being squished all the time all night long  like it was  [0:16:34]  Before, particularly if that person was a clencher at nighttime, they can't hurt themselves  anymore, and that tissue can kind of plump up, fill up with normal fluids, and then what's  going to happen? When they try to get their bite to go back to normal in the morning, is it  going to go back to normal? Well, no. So first of all, they got to get back off the disc. They  got to squirt off the disc, right? And then they got this tissue there, that retrodiscal tissue,  that has plumped up. It's not necessarily that it's inflamed. So when we think about  retrodiscitis, that name implies inflammation. It's not necessarily that it's inflamed. It could  just be, again, I'm using the word plumped up, it could just be more physiologic. If you,  again, if we look at our retrodiscal tissues here in the normal joint, that's a lot of tissue. So  that's a lot of stuff there when we bring that condyle all the way back. Whereas on the re -  ducing disc displacement, we got like one millimeter, all this tissue just squished there on  top of the condyle. There's no room. Since that is the habitual occlusal position, it's going  to be pushing any fluid that might come into those tissues out of those tissues.  [0:17:47]  They're vascular, right? So you can push that blood flow out. But if we hold that position  here, let me do that. So you see, I made a little space back here, right? And the person's  on the disc with their oral appliance for their sleep apnea. And as I mentioned, depending  on how long their jaws popped and clicked, it could have been years or decades since this  has been the case. Well, this tissue back in here, it wants to be full of blood. It wants to  have everything that it's supposed to have, that it does have in the normal joint. It wants to  look like that. And so you're going to give this a chance now. And that six, seven, eight  hours a night, that's going to do something, as well as fluid just within that capsule. But I  really kind of think of this in my mind's eye that those retrodiscal tissues are just actually  getting kind of more filled up like they normally would be versus when we have that person  closed down and they are off their disc. There's no room there. So that occlusion is what's  causing those tissues to be all squirted out of place, the disc and together.  [0:19:06]  And in case I haven't discussed this yet, let me make a point right now. And if I have, then I  just want to reinforce this. Why does this even happen? You would think that the discal po -  sition would be important. Well, why it happens is because occlusion, putting the teeth to -  gether, is more important. Well, why is that? Well, because swallowing, that's why. Swal -  lowing is key to living. If we can't stabilize our mandible and can't swallow, we will choke. If  we choke, we die. So it's related to airway, like so much of other things are. And I also  think, and I've run this by a whole bunch of orthodontists, that one of the reasons that we  have this happen in a bunch of teenagers is we treat them orthodontically when they're  just young, you know, preteen sometimes. But usually by the latest is 14 or so. And then  they still grow. And one of the growth centers of the mandible is the condyle. So if we've  kind of brought their maxilla into the definitive, this is where the maxilla is going to be, and  09/01/25   Page   of 6   15

SSC 2.0 - 309: Retrodiscitis Part 1  then the mandible grows, but the teeth fit where they fit. So the mandible is not going to  typically grow and then just all of a sudden be like forward.  [0:20:28]  Happens sometimes, but in the majority of time it's not. And as long as the brain can find  that bite, it's going to try to accommodate. That condyle grows as part of the growth of the  mandible, and all of a sudden, squirt, off goes the disc. This is the reason that you will  have so many of your patients say, oh yeah, my jaw started clicking after braces. Very,  very, very common for people to say that. It's not that the orthodontist caused it. It's that  their growth after orthodontics perhaps led to that. I don't like to throw the orthodontist un -  der the bus on this. If they had their way, they would probably also not treat people until  they were 17, 18 years old at the end of their growth spurt, but then taking advantage of  them being over growing by the end of their treatment so they could stabilize them. That  would be ideal. It's just not socially acceptable. So we do this on the kiddos, except in for -  eign countries. In foreign countries, a lot of people do get their orthodontics as adults  probably because that's when they can finally afford to pay for it themselves.  [0:21:31]  I hope that that review of the anatomy is helpful for you and that this also helps in your  treating sleep apnea patients. My phrase, right? Dental sleep medicine is the gateway  drug into TMD. So you possibly watched all this level three stuff at the very end. You've  watched everything else. You went one and two and even one. You might've just skipped  to the sleep stuff. And then two you watched and then four you watched because of mar -  keting and then five deep into sleep. Oh, that's awesome. Let's go into that more. And  then, you know what? Maybe I should watch some of this TMD stuff. When you under -  stand the TMD stuff, when you understand the joint stuff, the dental sleep medicine stuff  makes a lot more sense and you will understand why people have the problems that they  do. Okay. So that's our opening with the anatomy there that we always got to go to.  TMJ Demonstrator   [0:22:25]  The TMJ demonstrator. Once again, if you don't have this yet, Great Lakes Orthodontics,  and you can ask for Jennifer, and they will give you a discount as a Spencer Study Club  member. I think it's around 350 bucks or whatever. This is something you will use every  day in your practice, TMJ Demonstrator. And this can also show, and that doesn't have the  soft tissues of the retrodiscal tissue there, but you can explain to people that on this we  have our disc, and that disc has tissues behind it, and we call those the retrodiscal tissue  or the behind the disc tissues. And you can kind of imagine that those are coming off that  little yellow piece of plastic and going towards the ear opening there. And when the disc is  out of place, like yours is, then you see how that bone gets pushed back here and kind of  pinches. So that's pinching those tissues. People are going to respond to that. They're like,  oh wow, pinching my tissues. When it's completely out of place here, then wow, now we're  09/01/25   Page   of 7   15

SSC 2.0 - 309: Retrodiscitis Part 1  really pinching it, right? So if it's a little bit out of place versus super duper out of place,  we're going to be pinching on those tissues. And then ultimately, as we didn't talk about on  the last slide, but we do that long enough and put enough pressure on there and we can  actually blow through those tissues.  [ 0:23:39]  And that's where we have our bone on bone type of situations when we've blown through  that soft tissue. Use this, explain this to people. It will make sense. They'll understand the  anatomy behind this.  Retrodiscitis (Diagnosis)   [0:23:53]  Okay, so let's get into our retrodiscitis here. Diagnosis, history of trauma. And that trauma  could be getting punched in the face. It could also be wearing a sleep appliance. It could  be sleeping weird. I've had two, I think, maybe three, but for sure two retrodiscitis in my  life. Uh, no, you know what? I'm going to give that at least three, maybe even four. But the  kind of two, three, four were relatively close to each other and relatively recent. The first  time I had a retrodiscitis was a long time ago. I can't put a year on it, but I had a practice in  the Denver, Colorado area for a while. And I distinctly remember that I was wearing a  sleep appliance. It happened to be the one that I had invented called the silent sleep. And I  was doing great and everything seemed fine. And then one morning I woke up and I  couldn't get my teeth together. And normally, as you've heard me say before, I go back to -  gether pretty quick.  [0:24:59]  I wear my sleep appliance and on most nights and usually by, you know, nine, ten o'clock  I'm back together. Well this one was different because not only would my teeth not go back  together, but it was uncomfortable when I tried to get my teeth back together. That is hall -  mark for the retrodiscitis. And I was actually, believe it or not, you'll think this is kind of  weird, I was kind of excited about it. Why was I excited about it? Because I'd never had  this before and I treated it dang near every day in my practice. And so I got kind of like,  cool, I've never experienced this. I don't know what my patients are going through. This is  pretty neat. And again, I knew I would be fine, but I decided, hey, you know what would be  really cool is I know how to get myself better. So what if I actually super pissed this thing  off? And so I like stopped at the store on the way to the office there and I got some beef  jerky and I chewed on beef jerky during the day and I did things that I knew would kind of  irritate it.  [0:25:58]  And after a day or two of doing this, exacerbating the retrodiscitis, it was really bad. And I  had the posterior open bite. I had all the things I'm going to talk about here. And then I de -  cided, okay, cool, now let's treat it. And then I went through the treatment that I'll describe  to you here as well. And it got better. And then here's the reason I'm telling you the story  09/01/25   Page   of 8   15

SSC 2.0 - 309: Retrodiscitis Part 1  right now is I then went back to the oral appliance unchanged and I was fine. I didn't have  another retrodiscitis. I didn't have another jaw problem. I didn't have anything like that. I  just probably slept weird. Maybe it got dislodged during the middle of the night and I bit  down strange on it. I don't know what happened, but I just woke up with it. Now fast for -  ward like, you know, 15 years or so to more recently. And I woke up again with a retrodisci -  tis. So my right side and I typically sleep on my right side and I was like, oh, interesting.  You know, maybe fluid is flowing more to my right side because I'm laying on that side  more. Maybe that's it.  [0:27:05]  And then again, because I know the anatomy on this, I was like, let me try something. And  so I bit down hard progressively. So I didn't like really hard fast, but I progressively closed  and clenched. And in my mind's eye, I am thinking to myself, okay, I'm pushing this fluid  out of the joint capsule. I'm pushing it away. And so I'm just kind of clenching slowly, slowly  increasing the pressure until I get my teeth together. Hold it for like, you know, a minute or  two, just hold with the clench, let go of it, did it again. Okay, did that a few times and then I  was back to normal. Could you do that too? Sure. Could you teach that to your patients?  No. So I think your patient's going to do it wrong. So I don't teach that. I'm teaching that to  you now so that you understand what's going on, but I don't think that we should necessar -  ily do that with our patients. I might change my mind one day, but if you have that patient  that kind of struggles to get their bite back, you might teach them that, but help them to not  hurt themselves.  [0:28:15]  I have called the morning reprogrammer at times the morning reinjurer, because I think  some people pop that in, they've had their joint forward six, seven, eight hours, they've  filled up their retrodiscal tissues, and now they bite back with the help of that morning re -  programmer, and they can put a lot of force there, and that can hurt them. If the fluid's ac -  tually in the capsule, the capsule is closed, so there's no place for that to go. If it's in the  retrodiscal tissues, then those retrodiscal tissues are vascular. So if you put pressure on  them, then the vascularity, the pipes there, you're going to push that fluid through the  pipes. You just need to do it slow, because if you do it hard and fast, then you're going to  kind of blow out those pipes, that would be a itis, that would be the inflammation of it.  [0:29:04]  All right, back to our bullet points here. That's our history of trauma. Continuous TMJ pain  hurts in the joint all the time. Tenderness to palpation of the TM joint, so if you push with  your finger on the jaw joint, that is going to hurt. Range of motion is only slightly reduced.  [0:29:21]  So the way I like to describe this is if you hurt your ankle, if you sprained your ankle, you  would still be able to move your ankle, but your movements are going to be very gingerly,  they're going to be slow, you're not going to move quick, but typically you can take it  through range of motion, just doesn't feel good to do so. So their range of motion will typi -  cally be a little reduced, but then if you do sprain stretch procedure, they'll very often open  all the way. So that's a hallmark of a retrodiscitis when you are trying to figure out  09/01/25   Page   of 9   15

SSC 2.0 - 309: Retrodiscitis Part 1  retrodiscitis or non-reducing disc displacement. One of the hallmarks of retrodiscitis is we  do the sprain stretch and they go from 36 millimeters to 48 millimeters, whereas with a  non-reducing disc displacement, they go from 24-25 millimeters, you do sprain stretch and  they stay there basically, or they add a couple millimeters, but it's not like 24-25 to 38 or  45, whereas with a retrodiscitis, they'll be limited a bit, typically not all the way down to 26,  but they'll be limited a bit, but then after you do the sprain stretch, then it allows them to  open bigger because we're messing with those pain signals.  Posterior Open Bite   [0:30:36]  Posterior open bite on the injured side, so this is hallmark for this. When I have a right-  sided retrodiscitis, picture that fluid up in my joint. Picture that condyle now in a position  where it can't squeeze out all that fluid in the retrodiscal tissue, so can't get your teeth to -  gether. The condyle can't seat up there all the way, can't squash that tissue like it's normal -  ly used to, so therefore open bite on the affected side. The other side will typically hit, but it  will be weird because your bite is rather bilateral, right? And so if we have one side that's  off, the other side is going to feel off too. Sometimes you got to ask the questions, does  your bite feel off? And the patient may say, yeah, it's hitting harder, it's hitting weird on the  left side, and there are problems on the right side. The reason they're describing that is  because they don't even feel it on the right side, so they may take your attention away  from the side that's the problem because they comment on their bite feeling weird on the  opposite side, okay? It feels weird on the opposite side, but it's because their right side  with the right side retrodiscitis is the problem.  [0:31:46]  By the way, it is pretty normal for it to be unilateral. It's abnormal for it to be bilateral. There  are exceptions to every rule, and if the trauma involved getting hit in the chin straight on,  then it would be bilateral. Most people don't get hit in the chin straight on. They get hit to  the side one way or the other, and if they got hit on the left side, it's gonna be the right  retrodiscitis. On the right side, it's gonna be left retrodiscitis, so try to kind of think through  the trauma that they've had. If they're sleeping, then it's going to be more likely one side  versus the other side, stuff like that. Pain when clenching the teeth together on the injured  side, so if I try to seat that condyle all the way, then that's gonna hurt. Any type of the teeth  together is gonna be painful. No pain with clenching on a tongue depressor on the same  side, so if I have the right-sided retrodiscitis and I try to bite my teeth together, ouch, I put  something between my teeth on the same side, that won't hurt.  [0:32:46]  And because of this diagnosis, or this diagnostic testing, if you will, and diagnostic flow,  I've been able to diagnose this from thousands of miles away. I've diagnosed people with  retrodiscitis from Toronto, Canada, from down in Brazil, from all over the world, with people  reaching out to me because they know me from one way or another, and I'll get on a Zoom  09/01/25   Page   of 10   15

SSC 2.0 - 309: Retrodiscitis Part 1  meeting, or back in the olden days, I'd get on the phone, and I would just talk them through  it, and that sounds something like this. So your jaw hurts. Does it hurt on one side more  than the other? Yeah, it hurts on my right side. If you kind of push right there in front of  your ears, that uncomfortable? Yeah, that is uncomfortable. Does your bite feel weird to  you? Yeah, it seems like it's hitting a little bit harder on the left side, or it seems like I'm not  hitting very well on the right side. Okay, do me a favor. Try to bite your back teeth together.  Try to get your back teeth to mesh together. Is that worse? Better? No change? Oh my  gosh, that's worse. When I do that, that really hurts there.  [0:33:57]  Okay, do you have a pen sitting around or something like that? Something that you can put  between your teeth on that same side? Yeah, I've got my pointer here. Cool. Put that be -  tween your back teeth. Bite on that. Does that hurt? Is that worse? Better? No change?  Oh, that doesn't hurt at all. Okay, cool. Retrodiscitis. Okay, follow that. Replay that a cou -  ple times if you don't. That is the process. That's how we figure that out. The reason it  doesn't hurt when I put this between my teeth is I can't get that condyle anywhere close to  there. Go back to your anatomy there. I've stopped the condyle from going up there. If I  had a bruise on my leg and I put my hand over it and I hit my hand, it's not going to hurt  the bruise. Whereas if I hit the bruise directly, that's going to hurt. That's how we diagnose  our etrodiscitis. So there's kind of an overview of all the stuff with retrodiscitis. Let's go  ahead and take a little bit of time here and go through each of these points specifically and  give you some more examples of each of these points.  History of Trauma   [0:34:59]  With our history of trauma, back to kind of the trauma stuff, it can be acute trauma, like  getting hit in the face. It could be chronic trauma, like something that happens over and  over again. It could be episodic trauma, like what happened to me when I just kind of woke  up with it. And when that happened relatively recently, that was kind of episodic trauma.  Now, right now it's on a 15-year basis, so I don't know that I need to worry about that too  much. But if it started to become more regular, then I would certainly wonder what the  heck's going on. Parafunctional trauma are clenching and grinding. And the reason, of  course, parafunctional in quotes there is a parafunction or is it protective function? Is it  possible that that person is clenching, grinding their teeth to try to protect their airway so  they don't die? That's resulting in a retrodiscitis. What does your brain care more about,  retrodiscitis or air? Probably air, yes. So if somebody has this and you're like, well, that  sounds like you're clenching, grinding your teeth. To me, you're waking up with this prob -  lem. It gets better throughout the day, but every morning it's like terrible. Well, you better  rule out an airway issue there.  [0:36:08]  09/01/25   Page   of 11   15

SSC 2.0 - 309: Retrodiscitis Part 1  Or iatrogenic trauma. Uh-oh, that's not very nice. Iatrogenic, that means we caused it, yes,  or a doctor caused it. And this could be someone with their mouth open for a long time in  your chair. If they're really helping you, then they're stretching that retrodiscal tissue.  They're stretching their capsule. This would be way more common in an intubated patient,  a sedated patient who's then intubated. Once they stick that drug into you and get you in -  tubated, they're gonna open you. That's the most you're ever gonna open. Okay, so they're  not asking your permission to open your mouth, and you're gonna open pretty flippin' wide.  So it's very common, actually, for people after a surgery to be like, my jaw hurts. And that's  because of that forced opening, and they didn't have any ability to react to that. Your pa -  tients that are awake, if you had them open their mouth really wide, they're not gonna  open their mouth so wide that it hurts them. It might be a little uncomfortable, but it's not  gonna be to the point of damaging tissue. They just won't do that, right? But if you sedate  them, now all bets are off.  [0:37:22]  And that's going to cause a problem. Most people, they're just gonna kinda take that in  stride. They're probably on anti-inflammatories after their surgery or whatever anyway. It's  gonna take care of it, but just be aware of that, that that could be the trauma. Yeah, I had  shoulder surgery, and all of a sudden my jaw hurt afterwards. Yeah, that's because you  were intubated.  Continuous TMJ Pain   [0:37:43]  Now let's talk about the continuous TMJ pain. So it's always gonna have kind of this dull  ache. It's gonna be worse with movement, opening. Okay, so anything, think of anything  that's going to move the jaw joint. They'll want to be kind of still. Again, think of a sprained  ankle. You don't wanna really move it that much. When you do move it, that's going to hurt  worse. It hurts worse with occlusion. That's because of the swelling in the joint. Hurts more  to chew on the opposite side. Uh-oh, did I throw you a curveball there? So if they have a  retrodiscitis on the right side, if they are chewing on the left side, that actually causes the  condyle on the right side to seat more.  [0:38:21]  So ironically, and you'll tell the patients to do this, or you could ask them too as part of your  questioning. You could say, so have you noticed? Does it hurt you? Oh yeah, it really hurts  to chew. Have you noticed what kind of foods actually hurt more? And most people will be  like, actually, I tried to eat a salad the other day, and that was terrible. But it's kind of weird  is if I eat meat, that doesn't hurt as much. And then you follow up with, and have you no -  ticed that one side feels better? Like which side feels better to chew on? And don't lead the  witness, right? So ask the questions in such a way that they give you their honest answer,  and then you are always, does that seem right or does that seem weird? They'll say, well,  actually, if I chew on the right side, if it's something like meat, it doesn't really hurt. Okay,  09/01/25   Page   of 12   15

SSC 2.0 - 309: Retrodiscitis Part 1  that makes sense. Okay, do you track with me there on all that stuff? That is hurting on the  opposite side, especially if they're trying to put their teeth all the way together, then that's  going to hurt more on the right  [0:39:22]  Side if their teeth have to go all the way to occlusion. If they have space between their  teeth, like chewing meat, then they may not hurt at all on that side. So ironically, when they  have a retrodiscitis on the right side, I would tell the patient to chew on the right side and  actually to avoid foods that make them have to go all the way together.  Tenderness to Palpation   [0:39:43]  Okay? All right, next, let's talk about our tenderness to palpation, the TM joint. You're going  to palpate over that lateral pole, just kind of right there. Some people have been taught,  most people watching this video will not have been taught this, but if you're kind of an old  timer and you went to Panky or stuff like that, you may have been taught to palpate  through the ear canal, as in go into their ear and push forward. That will hurt. Now, the bad  news is, is that kind of always hurts. So it's not that helpful. If you put your pinkies in there  and pull forward, most people are going to be like, yeah, that's uncomfortable. Well, part of  the reason that's uncomfortable is because it's never been done before in their life.  [0:40:23]  And also just that tissue in our ear canal is sensitive to pressures. If you think of putting in  earplugs that are hard or something like that, any kind of force in your ear canal is uncom -  fortable. I've never done that. That makes no sense to me. Any type of palpation that  you're doing that 99% of the world is going to say, yeah, that's uncomfortable. I just don't  know what that's supposed to tell you. If you're using it for some sort of show to be like, oh,  yeah, see, that hurts, implying to them that it shouldn't hurt. Well, then, OK, I guess that  would be a reason to do it. I don't think you should do that. I don't think you should put on  a show for the patient. I think that you should try to be figuring out what's actually wrong  with them. So don't do that. You can palpate with the patient opens. So if they open, now  you can push kind of on the back part there, too. So if you do that with me right now, teeth  together is one thing. Open a little bit, and you're going to get more access to that retrodis -  cal tissue, aren't you? That posterior aspect of the condyle. So that is fair game. Just don't  go in their ear canal.  Range of Motion   [0:41:31]  Range of motion only slightly reduced. Normal, remember, is 48 to 52 with our three fin -  gers. That's our normal range of motion. Typically, they'll be in the upper 30s to lower 40s.  As I mentioned before, this is not like a non-reducing disc displacement acute that's 26  09/01/25   Page   of 13   15

SSC 2.0 - 309: Retrodiscitis Part 1  millimeters. So typically, upper 30s, low 40s opening will tend to be slow and careful. The  affected side will be more painful than the opposite side. So when they do stretch open,  they'll say, yeah, ow, that hurts right there. The spray and stretch procedure will typically  allow them to open more because they're not going to feel the pain as much because of  the cold. So I do recommend our spray and stretch in retrodyschitis in order to have them  feel that like, oh, that feels better. I'm able to open bigger, cool. And then they understand  that you understand what's going on.  Posterior Open Bite   [0:42:23]  Posterior open bite, the teeth not going to completely occlude on that injured side. The  other side, they will typically hit, but the patient's going to say, yeah, that feels weird.   My  bite's kind of off. Sometimes you can see it. Sometimes it's just you slide like shim stock or  articulating paper back there. It's not real obvious. That's going to have a lot to do with  their overbite. If they have a relatively deep overbite and then we've got that fluid there that  they can't close down all the way, that's going to kind of bring their jaw forward a little bit,  bonking them up against the front teeth. That's going to result in a more obvious posterior  open bite. But even if they don't have an obvious posterior open bite, you might go in with  shim stock and typically you will see it's like, oh, yep, you don't hold shim stock. Now, in  my original lecture in level one, I put a little nut on that. If you remember in that lecture, the  all TMJ patients are nuts lecture because oftentimes when you're thinking a patient have a  TMJ problem, you're looking for their occlusion being high on that side because that's what  you were taught. That if you have a high occlusion, the person's going to bite on it, that's  going to cause pain. And in this case, they don't occlude at all.  [0:43:40]  Clearly, the problem isn't the other side. So don't make that. I hope that I don't even need  to say that, but just in the rare chance that there's someone in Spencer Study Club that's  like, well, yeah, why don't I equilibrate the whole other side in order to get those teeth to  touch? I'm sure that there's no one in Spencer Study Club that would think that, but just  don't think that. And make sure that you're out there teaching people that that is definitely  not our problem. It's not that the other side is hitting too hard.  Pain with Clenching   [0:44:09]  Pain when clenching, their teeth together on the injured side. So the occlusion of the teeth  results in compression of those swollen tissues. Just remember that they're all kind of filled  up. This is also with the sleep appliance that's held them forward for six, seven, eight  hours. Swollen, if you will, or just kind of full of fluid like they should be. And when we go to  bite down, that compression of that is uncomfortable. Teeth on the opposite side will come  09/01/25   Page   of 14   15

SSC 2.0 - 309: Retrodiscitis Part 1  together without pain, but again, going to feel weird. So it doesn't hurt for them to bite  down on the low side, but it will feel like their teeth don't mesh up right. Because their teeth  don't mesh up right because the other side is skeewampus.  No Pain with Clenching   [0:44:53]  No pain clenching on the tongue depressor on the same side. So putting the tongue de -  pressor between the teeth or sometimes two tongue depressors stacked. So sometimes  the one is not enough space in the condyle so you might double it up. So this limits the  compression of the capsule, reduces or eliminates the pain when clenching. Now why a  tongue depressor instead of a cotton roll? Well that's because we don't want to induce  placebo effect in our diagnosis. And if you say okay try to bite your teeth together, how's  that feel? Yeah that hurts. Okay bite on this cotton roll, how's that feel? So most people  would think a cotton roll and you know sometimes I say you know bite on this cloud-like  fluffy cotton roll. If you have them bite on a cotton roll, intuitively you're going to feel like  well that's going to feel better. So they'll say it feels better and it will feel better. So a cotton  roll, does it matter if it's hard or soft whatever you put between the teeth? No it's just a  spacer.  [0:45:58]  Okay whatever you put between the teeth as long as it's creating space between the  condyle and the retrodiscal tissues that it's banging on, it's going to feel better. It's not  magic that it's the tongue depressor. What is magic about the tongue depressor is nobody  anticipates that putting a stick between their teeth and biting on a stick is going to feel bet -  ter. That is non-intuitive. That's why we use a stick. Or again if it's over the phone or zoom  or whatever just something hard. Do they have a pen there? Do they have something that  again they would never think to themselves oh biting on that's going to feel better. Clench -  ing on the tongue depressors placed on both sides will typically not be painful either. Now  this could be a little confusing you put both tongue depressors in and they'll typically be  like yeah that doesn't hurt either. I don't do that. Some people teach that which is why I put  this in here. I don't think that's necessary. It doesn't really give me more information. I  know that the pain's on the right side. I know the open bite's on the right side and so that's  why I typically stick on the same side that they're having the pain.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 15   15

