SSC 2.0 - 313: Enthesis Injections  SSC 2.0   Level 3  313: Enthesis Injections  [intro music]  Enthesis   [0:00:12]  Welcome back to another episode of injections outside the deep dark hole and one inside.  In this episode, we're going to talk about enthesis problems. If you're watching these out of  order, I would suggest that you watch the myofascial pain one first because I'm going to  talk about trigger points in that or I did talk about trigger points for watching them in order.  And now we're going to talk about enthesis. And then lastly, we're going to talk about TMJ  and and those injections.  Enthesopathy   [0:00:38]  So what is enthesopathy? Well, the enthesis is the site of insertion of muscles, tendons,  and ligaments into bones or joint capsules. And muscles typically have tendons and mus -  cles themselves also can insert right into the bone like masseter comes to mind. Liga -  ments are bone to bone. So tendons are muscle to typically bone or a joint capsule. Liga -  ments are bone to bone. So the enthesis is where those things attach into bone or joint  capsules. And enthesopathy is going to be a problem at that enthesis. So that's what we're  going to talk about in this section is these connections of ligaments and/or muscles to the  bone. So enthesopathy, as the name implies, is a problem at those connection sites. Some  of our connections that we're going to talk about are the TMJ ligaments and retrodiscal tis -  sues, origin insertions of muscles of mastication, primarily temporal tendon. Next, mas -  seter, medial pterygoid, lateral pterygoid probably has this too, but it's just way less com -  mon than temporal tendon is going to be by far the most. Masseter is going to be next,  medial pterygoid, lateral pterygoid after that. Stylomandibular ligament, also called Ernest  syndrome, and the occipital muscular attachments, and that's going to be called occipital  neuralgia. So here's the different names for those problems. We're going to call it temporal  tendonitis, Ernest syndrome, masseter origin insertion problems, and occipital neuralgia.  Sprain and Strain   [ 0:02:25]  09 /01/25   Page   of 1   19

SSC 2.0 - 313: Enthesis Injections  Now, let's talk really quickly about what is a sprain and what is a strain. And you may know  this already, but a sprain, when I say sprain, you probably think spraining your ankle. So a  sprained ankle. So a sprain is ligaments. A strain is tendon. And how I remember that, just  so if I'm talking to my physical therapy colleagues or physical medicine colleagues, they  would know the difference between a sprain and a strain. And now you will too, if you hear  that term from somebody who knows what they're talking about. Strain is going to be ten -  dons, so I remember that because strain has a T in it. So strain is tendon, sprain is liga -  ments.  Temporal Tendonitis   [0:03:06]  Let’s start off with temporal tendonitis because again, this is going to be the most common  one you see. Very, very, very common. So this is defined as an orificial pain disorder and it  can cause referred pain. And that should, if you watch these in order, should take you back  to trigger points. So trigger points, we think about referred pain. And these enthesis prob -  lems, if you remember in the trigger point discussion, I mentioned a attachment trigger  point that is defined by Dr. Travell and Simons in their book, an attachment trigger point.  Well, attachment of what? Attachment of muscle to the bone is an attachment trigger point.  So you could call these different things that we're talking about, you could probably refer to  them as attachment trigger points and that would be correct. So the terminology that we're  going to use just so that we can talk to each other is if you said to me, hey Jamison, I think  I have a patient, I think they have an attachment trigger point at the coronoid process. I  could follow you with that since I teach this, but most people would be like, okay, yeah, I'm  not really familiar with attachment trigger points at the coronoid process. Let me look up  what the coronoid process is again and let's see attachments as a temporalis and they're  like, are you talking about temporal tendonitis? Like someone might be able to get there.  So it's just a lot easier for us to say temporal tendonitis rather than attachment trigger  point. But the point is that this can have referred pain.  Symptoms   [0:04:46]  So some of the symptoms and this first one is not a symptom, it's an etiology, I'll cover that  again in a second. But pain of the temporal tendon is going to be a symptom. Temporal  muscle pain as well, so in the temporalis. Referred pain and remember this part. So re -  ferred pain into the jaw joint, eye, ear and really make note of this, report of pressure. This  is a unique aspect of temporal tendonitis that people will say the term pressure. I have  pressure in my ear. If you ever hear that, think temporal tendonitis. Just tuck that away. If  someone's like, yeah, this pressure in my ear is really bothering me. And very often these  referrals will come from an ear, nose and throat doctor because they have pressure in their  09 /01/25   Page   of 2   19

SSC 2.0 - 313: Enthesis Injections  ear. They don't have pain in their jaw joint. And so they go to the ear, nose and throat doc -  tor. The ear, nose and throat doctor does their workup, says you have TMJ, see your den -  tist. And then they come into you and they're like, yeah, pressure in my ear.  [0:05:43]  What are you doing here for? I mean, I'm a dentist. I don't treat ear problems. See your  ENT. I already saw my ENT. My ENT sent me to you because they said there's no problem  with my ear. This is the TMJ patients are nuts, not understanding their symptoms. So  make note of that, that as soon as you hear them say that, you're going straight to the  temporal tendon and nine times out of 10, it's going to be hot and you're going to be right.  And we'll talk about what you do about that. Okay. Maxillary teeth as well. So just pain into  the teeth. That should be again, consistent with what you learned about the temporalis  muscle. Remember that that refers into the maxillary teeth as well. Huh? These things are  kind of overlapping, aren't they?  Etiology   [0:06:29]  All right. Etiology, often trauma. Now, the trauma could be getting hit in the jaw, like we've  talked about before with other problems. It could be clenching their teeth, parafunction,  possibly due to OSA. It could be loss of VDO. It could be loss of posterior support, both of  those causing a change in how their teeth together. And really on both the VDO and the  loss of posterior support, meaning no teeth back there, it's having an effect on how they  chew. If they have 1% occlusion, then they're using their teeth primarily to chew and swal -  low. And if you mess that up and all of a sudden they have to go from using my bicep here,  if I was kind of like right in here most of the time, and now I'm like up in here, that's going  to be very different feeling than if I'm in that kind of power zone. Whenever you're at the  edges of the muscle length, that works that muscle very, very differently. So same thing  here. Now let's also, I always like to try to connect this with sleep apnea stuff at the same  time.  [0:07:35]  Well, when might we have this issue with oral appliance therapy? What is a loss of support  with oral appliance therapy? Well, maybe it's not a loss per se, it's a giving them an appli -  ance that doesn't have posterior support. And that should be confusing a little bit for you,  because let's say you use an anterior pull push appliance, has a point stop in the front, like  an NTI. And you're thinking, well, I was taught that when you have an appliance like that, it  turns off the muscles basically. They can't put as much force. That's true when we're  awake, and you can test that. So clench on your back teeth, feel that anterior temporalis,  bite on your front teeth, feel the anterior temporalis, you probably barely feel it even con -  tract. That nociceptive inhibition is something that happens when we're awake, not as  much when we sleep. So people can still be trying to get their teeth together and do things  like that, but they don't have that support of the muscle. And maybe getting rid of that sup -  09 /01/25   Page   of 3   19

SSC 2.0 - 313: Enthesis Injections  port makes them do it more, ironically. So you will see this, and not like all the time. I do  not believe if you're using an anterior pull push appliance that you should automatically  add posterior support.  [0:09:01]  I don't think you need to do that. You can if you want. I'm fine if you do, but I don't think you  need to. But you will have people that are like, oh, my muscles hurt when I wear this, and  you've checked, they're snoring, you checked that they're feeling better, you're pretty con -  fident that the airway's protected, you're pretty confident that they're not fighting the appli -  ance. That's where, and if you go back to level two where we talked about all this stuff,  that's where you add posterior support, and I'll be darned if most of the time that doesn't  feel better. Now, note that I didn't say you add posterior support all the time, because you  could have some people that putting posterior support in there maybe messes with their  freeway space a little bit and causes them to rest on the appliance, i.e., contracting their  muscles where they normally wouldn't. So anyway, just to put this into the oral appliance  realm here, a person could have temporal tendonitis, and this could be related to their oral  appliance therapy for those reasons.  Diagnosis (History - Palpation of Temporal Tendon)   [0:10:02]  Okay. Diagnosis, we are going to listen to their history, listen for those telltale signs of I got  pressure in my ear, listen for potential trauma, and then we're going to palpate. And palpat -  ing the temporal tendon should be pretty easy for you because this is where you put your  thumb when you're doing an inferior alveolar nerve block. Okay. If you're right-handed, you  would be doing that when you go to the left. When you go to the right, or excuse me, to the  patient's right, you would do that. Going to the other side, you might not do that. You have  a different way of doing that. But you're fairly used to getting your finger in there and  putting it on the temporal tendon. Having said that, you may not normally palpate the tem -  poral tendon, although you should for any kind of TMJ problem, including for sleep apnea  patients because if their temporal tendon is hot, that's going to tell you that there could be  a potential problem.  [0:11:03]  Now, it's not uncommon for people to be like, that doesn't feel very good. So if you palpate  your temporal tendon, you might be like, yeah, that doesn't feel awesome. So a, yeah, a  little tender, that to me is just kind of a, so on our forms, on our exam forms for TMD and  sleep, we just have kind of zero would be no pain, and three is a jump sign. So three is  like, ow, like, ah, that's it. If I just push and they're just kind of, ah, it's a little bit tender,  that's a one. That's a one. So that's kind of more almost like normal tenderness would be  a, yeah, yeah, I feel that a little bit. Zero, fine as well. Two would be like, oh, ow, yeah,  that's uncomfortable. Three is either jump sign or you see their eyes flinch and wince in  kind of pain.  09 /01/25   Page   of 4   19

SSC 2.0 - 313: Enthesis Injections  [0:11:58]  All right. So intraoral is going to be your typical method of doing this. Below the cheekbone  is another way. So you can palpate. So let's say that you're at a party or something and  someone's talking about this and you're like, oh, it sounds like you could have temporal  tendonitis, let me check. You just put your finger below their cheekbone, have them open.  Do this on yourself right now. Open and your coronary process is going to come right right  to your finger. Okay. Right down. Boom. That's it. Palpate fairly hard there because you're  pushing some tissue on top of it. So it's going to be a pad there. That is another way to do  this. Now a little aside, and I didn't put this slide in. You can go back to the muscle palpa -  tion lecture and if you, again, are watching these videos from level one to level two, level  three, you may remember me having a picture of somebody in excruciating pain who is  having his lateral pterygoid palpated and they actually were palpating the lateral pterygoid.  I think probably 90 plus percent of dentists who think they're palpating the lateral pterygoid  are palpating the coronary process.  [0:13:05]  They're palpating the temporal tendon because there's no way they're that far back. Just  for kicks, although I hate to have you give these people hits on their YouTube page, but if  you put into YouTube palpation of the lateral pterygoid and you find even people should  know better, like physical therapists, they should know their anatomy pretty well, but  there's dentists for sure that do this. And you'll see them put their pinky in and you can still  see this knuckle, and they're like right there, right? Ow, that's it, isn't it patient? They're  telling the patient that they're having pain or they aren't having pain. And then usually  they'll equilibrate or they'll do something. A chiropractor might adjust their neck or some -  thing and then go in. But you can tell it's like, dude, there's no way that you're anywhere  close to the lateral pterygoid. They're on the coronary process. So that's how you're going  to palpate it too. You're just going to know what you're doing.  Diagnostic Anesthetic Block   [ 0:14:02]  Diagnostic anesthetic block. All right. Now, this is one of the most common blocks that  we're going to do diagnostically. So the temporal tendonitis and the TMJ are both areas  that we will use a diagnostic block to help us figure out if we're right or not. And particular -  ly, let's say that we go back to that referred pain thing. Let's say you have a patient and  their chief complaint is pressure in their ear. And they already saw an ear, nose and throat  doctor. The ear, nose and throat doctor sent them to you. And/or the ear, nose and throat  doctor said, see your dentist. So if that's the case and they got nothing else wrong, they're  normal range of motion. They say that, yeah, it hurts to eat a little bit, but mostly my diet's  normal and just nothing's making sense. But then you palpate the temporal tendon and  they're like, ouch. Okay. Temporal tendon is a little harder to do spray and stretch with be -  cause it's under all this skin here. You can still do it. You can still do spray and stretch. It's  09 /01/25   Page   of 5   19

SSC 2.0 - 313: Enthesis Injections  just not quite as good as up here on the temporalis. And again, we got the zygomatic arch.  We've got the masseter here. We got the cheek.  [0:15:10]  We got a lot of stuff going on there. The injection, on the other hand, is easy to do. And  then you just let your anesthetic do its job. And then come back and like, hey, curious,  does that make any difference with the ear pressure? Worse, better, no change. And  they're going to be like, hmm, that's gone. Yeah. That ear pressure is better now. That's  what you're looking for. So with a diagnostic injection, by the way, so I know I've taught you  in the past that there's sometimes where it's worse or better are both good because that  means we're messing with the right thing, not with the diagnostic injection. So with a diag -  nostic injection, it should always be better because it's anesthetic. So it's either better or if  it's not better and you ask them multiple ways to make sure they're just not confused on  what they should be experiencing, then that means it's somewhere else.  [0:16:05]  It's diagnostic because we're figuring out is this right or not. If you give them, and again, let  me kind of go into more detail on this. So with a diagnostic injection, we're going to ask be -  fore we do this, zero is no pain, 10 is being burned alive. What's your pain level right now?  And they'll give you a number. And then you do the anesthetic block and you come back in  and, hey, remember zero is nothing, 10 is being burned alive. You said you were a six be -  fore. What is it now? And then they will say whatever they say. Now, if they say anything  other than 0, you got to ask some more questions because it's anesthetic. They should be  numb. If this is the correct area, now they could have more than one thing going on. So  they could have temporal tendonitis and maybe it is the jaw joint too. So ask and if they  say, yeah, that's gone. That feels awesome. Oh my gosh, you're a genius. It's amazing.  Thank you.  [0:17:08]  Cool. Diagnostic injection success. You know what's going on, temporal tendonitis. We'll  talk about how to treat it. On the other hand, if they're like, it's about a three now, then I  would go back to, all right, point with one finger to where it hurts the most. And they're like,  “here”, and maybe before they did point “here”. Or they said, “yeah, it's kind of in my  mouth. It's in my jaw. It hurts in my ear”. But if they come back and they're like, “well, yeah,  that's better, but here”. Well, is it possible that they could have a trigger point in the tempo -  ralis and the belly of the temporalis muscle? You bet. Is it possible that it's in the joint, that  their joint does hurt? You bet. So treat this kind of like the whole trigger point thing that  when we do our anesthetic block, when we do things like that, we are looking for the re -  sponse to give us information on what's our next step. Are we done or are we still looking?  Are we still searching? So that's a diagnostic block. Here's some other pictures of just how  to palpate. Again, should be pretty knowledgeable about this as a dentist because you use  this landmark when you were doing inferior alveolar nerve blocks.  09 /01/25   Page   of 6   19

SSC 2.0 - 313: Enthesis Injections  Treatment   [0:18:27]  So let's talk now about treatment for temporal tendonitis. And these aren't necessarily in  order. How you would treat this will depend a lot on your practice and things like that. But  let's say that as a bit of a beginner, you used a diagnostic injection to diagnose this. And  the person's like, oh my gosh, that's amazing. I feel great. Well, then why not do a thera -  peutic injection? Because you just did great with the anesthetic block for diagnosis.  They're already there. Why not? Let's go for it. So I would tend, for temporal tendonitis, I  tend to do injections because of that immediate improvement in conjunction with physical  therapy. That's the third bullet point here. Because I like them to go to the physical thera -  pist.  Injection Therapy   [0:19:28]  So with injection therapy, what do we inject? I'll talk more about what we inject just kind of  in general, but long-lasting anesthetics with a little drop of steroid. And when I say a drop  of steroid, I mean a drop of steroid. So you might have a carpal of Marcaine and you just  squirt out a little bit, tenth of a cc perhaps. And then you've got your dexamethasone, four  milligrams per milliliter dexamethasone, suck up just a tiny bit into that Marcaine. It's going  to swish around in the Marcaine there. And then I would give them, say, half a carpal of  that Marcaine-dexamethasone solution. Now having said that, nowadays I and my part -  ners way more lean to PRF. And I'll give you a little data on that. And steroids work. But for  me and my family, even for a tendon issue.  [0:20:27]  I would rather have PRF. I'm all about regeneration, not kind of breaking stuff down. And  steroids do help with pain, but they're helping with pain not necessarily because they're  making it better, but they're getting rid of the inflammation that's there. And oftentimes the  inflammation is trying to do good. It's just maybe overblown. So you get my point. So I tend  to teach PRF now. As a matter of fact, let's say that you have not taken the PRF course  yet. And you're thinking, well, injection therapy or just physical therapy. If I'm treating you  and I have that limitation for whatever reason, I send you to physical therapy first. Let's say  that I'm visiting somewhere and I don't have anyone licensed to do this sort of thing, but  I'm there, I would get the person to a physical therapist. They all know how to treat this, by  the way. And again, they're very comfortable with treating an enthesis type problems. They  do it all day long. So I would get them to a physical therapist and I wouldn't do the shot. I  would then be looking for someone and they might have to travel to get PRF. That's what I  would do. But here's other stuff. And we'll talk about these things later on when we talk  about TMJ injections as well.  09 /01/25   Page   of 7   19

SSC 2.0 - 313: Enthesis Injections  Sarapin, Prolotherapy, PRF or Botox   [ 0:21:59]  Sarapin. Prolotherapy, that's injecting sugar water. So dextrose, that's the first time I've  talked about prolotherapy. Prolotherapy is actually causing an inflammatory response,  whereas PRF is also kind of causing inflammatory response, but it's putting all of those  growth factors and healing factors right there at the spot. So again, PRF is going to be my  go-to. Botox for tendon issues. Maybe that kind of makes sense, but not as much. The  Botox is going to have a impact mostly on motor units and that connection between that  skeletal nerve and the motor units. When you're down to the tendon level, you're not really  treating the motor units anymore, are you?  [0:22:47]  So typically when you think of Botox, you are thinking of into a muscle, into the belly of a  muscle, even if it's for wrinkles, that's what you're doing in order to affect that muscle's  ability to contract and how that's done is mostly the connection with the skeletal nerve that  is going to that group of motor units. So for tenderness issues, that doesn't really make a  lot of sense to me. If you were using Botox and your thought process was, well, I'm treat -  ing a temporal tendonitis and I'm doing this with Botox, that would make sense to me if you  said, I think that's because the person is clenching their teeth quite a bit. They're going  through some emotional stress that's causing them to clench their teeth more than they  normally do. I think that's why they're having this problem. I'm gonna turn off that muscle to  a degree for a little bit, see if that makes a difference. Okay. I'll buy that. Again, that's not  what I would do on my wife. So I would tend to use PRF and other things like splint thera -  py, the last dot here. I would do that instead.  Anti-Inflammatories   [0:23:58]  Anti-inflammatories, cool. Just remember that we gotta be a little bit sophisticated there. If  we're doing anti-inflammatories, then we would not be doing PRF at the same time. So  anti-inflammatories with a couple drops of steroid there, local, no problem. So just kind of  think that through of when would I use NSAIDs, when I would not.  Physical Therapy   [0:24:20]  Physical therapy, get a relationship with physical therapists. And if I haven't talked about  that yet, let me do so now. A good physical therapist is worth their weight in gold with treat -  ing TMJ problems and guess with what else? Yeah, treating sleep apnea patients. Be -  cause why? Because sleep apnea patients can sometimes have TMJ problems. And  you're gonna wanna have people that know how to do manual therapy, know how to do  different modalities, not necessarily being iontophoresis and phonophoresis and all that  09 /01/25   Page   of 8   19

SSC 2.0 - 313: Enthesis Injections  stuff, although most physical therapists do that, but not all do. The physical therapists that I  work with that don't do those types of modalities, they do dry needling. They do the acu -  puncture needle stuff. And in both Boise and our Salt Lake practice, I'll bet you that it is  rare for us to have a day that we don't refer someone to physical therapy. That would be  rare. Super rare, actually. So make sure you have that person on your team. Physical  therapy is, in general, covered by insurance.  [0:25:23]  Our physical therapist in Salt Lake only works with a couple insurance companies. Our  one that's for our Boise office, they work with everybody. And it's nice. It's nice for the pa -  tient to be able to send them somewhere. And by the way, working with physical therapists  tends to strengthen your diagnosis as well as your credibility because you say what you  think is going on, and the patient probably believes you. But then they go into the physical  therapist, and the physical therapist is digging the heck on their temporal tendon or what -  ever, making them cry with their manual therapy, and the patient's like, okay, well, that  dentist was right. And also, when you're doing your thing, by comparison to what the phys -  ical therapist does, they like coming to you by comparison, even if you're given a shot, that  is no big deal compared to the manual therapy the physical therapists do. If you've never  had this done, as you are figuring out physical therapists to work with, I would go to that  physical therapist and have them treat you.  [0:26:30]  This is like a massage therapist. You go to a massage therapist, and sometimes you get  the one, and they're kind of like, hey, is this pressure okay? And you're like, through your  tears, like, yeah, that's okay. At least I've had that experience. Maybe you haven't. There's  sometimes it's like way too much, and you're like, I'm never going back to that person  again. And then there's sometimes it's way too soft. You're like, okay, it's massage from my  girlfriend in high school. That's not what I'm going for here. I'm trying to get a therapeutic  massage. Same thing with physical therapists, and I think it's nice for you to experience  that. I've been to my physical therapist in Boise, went to see him many, many times, and  our physical therapist here in Salt Lake, she treats basically my whole family whenever we  have a problem. And I know that they're awesome. So worth their weight in gold, little  aside there, little tangent, very, very, very important.  Biofeedback (Splint therapy)   [ 0:27:23]  Biofeedback, and to put into connection there with splint therapy as biofeedback, remem -  ber that the main reason we're using a splint during the day, two main reasons. So one is  the lips together, teeth apart, teach them that biofeedback. The other one, of course, is if  they have a reducing disc displacement, we want them to stay in CR as much as possible.  So that's the other reason for a day splint. But if you have somebody with temporal ten -  donitis, and you're like, hey, are you aware of clenching your teeth during the day? I'm not  09 /01/25   Page   of 9   19

SSC 2.0 - 313: Enthesis Injections  aware of it, but you see them contracting their masseters as they're talking to you, or they  say, well, you know what? I think I might do that. Then maybe you would do a splint during  the day in order to teach them that. And then there's also shockwave therapy. I don't know  any of our field that's using this right now. Shockwave therapy is used a lot in regenerative  medicine and kind of all over the body. So that could be something that you could use too.  Spot for Injection   [0:28:23]  Here is our spot for the injection. So I like on this skull that I have, and I've had this skull  forever. So you have the temporalis up here, and then that's the white parts kind of indi -  cating the muscle. And then we got this red down there, again, that's the tendon. And the  tendon goes all the flipping way down. So just like this model shows it going all the way  down. So what I typically like to do is kind of hit the coronoid process at the tip, and then I  kind of go down and get down to where you would do like a long buckle injection. So we're  kind of hitting it at least once and then two or three times more. So one, two, three as we  go down. Your diagnostic injection can just be right at the tip of the coronoid process. Usu -  ally that'll be good enough. And that's also because of the infiltration nature of that. That'll  get the whole thing. But therapeutically, you're trying to hit it. And this can be a little... I'll  give you a heads up on this because you can put your thumb right on the coronoid  process, and you take your 27 gauge needle right near your thumb, and then you go, and  you're like, where is it? And it's really weird because you're like, how come I'm not hitting  that thing? And just remember, it's a blade So depending on your angulation, you might be  coming at it sideways, which should be easy to hit, or you might just be sliding right past it,  and you're going right on past the temporal tendon.  [0:29:50]  So if you're sliding past, you're not hitting that bone, then you need to come redirect, kind  of go more out their cheek like you're going out their cheek. Don't go out their cheek, but  you're looking for that bone. So if your thumb is at the front of the coronoid process and  you go in similar to what you would do for an inferior alveolar nerve block, you're just far -  ther toward, you're closer to your thumb, and you miss, then that means you're sliding  along that. So you want to redirect, be pretty close to your thumb, but you're going more at  an angle perpendicular to where you think the bone is. If you're going more parallel, then  you could just completely miss it. And it's surprising when you do that because you're like,  man, my thumb is right on this thing and I'm missing it. That's what's happening. Okay. So  I'll kind of get this again, shooting it in different ways. Okay. So that is temporal tendonitis.  And that's going to be way more common than these other things I'm going to talk about.  So get good with that one. When we do our injection courses and the PRF courses and  stuff, temporal tendonitis is definitely one that we go over. This one should be easy. That  was the one that's inside the deep dark hole. So in the injections outside the deep dark  hole and one inside, that was the one inside. You should be totally comfortable with tem -  09 /01/25   Page   of 10   19

SSC 2.0 - 313: Enthesis Injections  poral tendonitis. You can practice that tomorrow. It's right there in the mouth. You use topi -  cal like you use in the mouth. Piece of cake. The rest of them are going to be a little bit un -  comfortable because you haven't done outside the deep dark hole. That one should be  super duper comfortable and lucky for you, common for people to have temporal ten -  donitis.  Stylomandibular Ligament (Ernest Syndrome)   [ 0:31:31]  All right. Let's move on now to the stylomandibular ligament or so-called Ernest syndrome.  And this was named after a guy named Edwin Ernest. Actually not positive if Dr. Ernest is  still alive. I met him years ago, super duper nice guy. And the Ernest syndrome is from this  stylomandibular ligament. So we have our styloid process there and the mandible, that's  the stylomandibular ligament. This is a curious thing here that there are some anatomists  that don't believe there is such a thing as a stylomandibular ligament. They think it is a  thickening of the cervical fascia. Don't care, really. There not only can be, but there will be  an attachment between the styloid process and the mandible. And then there's also a con -  nection between the styloid process and the hyoid bone. And that's called Eagle's syn -  drome. So that's different. So styloid to hyoid is Eagle's syndrome. And that's where you  see the, when you see the big elongated styloid processes, super big, and sometimes little  fractures you think in there because it's calcified, that's usually an ENT thing. And I don't  actually have Eagle's syndrome in our stuff here because it's not something that we will  tend to inject.  [0:33:05]  However, before I go into Ernest syndrome, let me give you a story. And the story goes  that there was a patient who came to see me and his problem started, and Eagle's syn -  drome and Ernest syndrome have actually similar symptomatologies, similar presenta -  tions. And he had seen his dentist and all of this started after an inferior alveolar nerve  block. And he described it that his dentist was having a hard time getting him numb. And  then on kind of the last try, he goes in and the patient actually felt something break. And  what happened is it was the stylohyoid calcified ligament that broke. And that then created  this pain problem for him. And he saw all sorts of people, including ear, nose, and throat  doctors. And the ear, nose, and throat doctor thought it could be Eagle's syndrome, and  that's an ear, nose, and throat doctor diagnosis, Eagle's syndrome, or also called Costen's  syndrome.  [0:34:12]  And Costen's syndrome is also sometimes just another way of saying TMJ as well in ENT  circles. So, the ENT refers him to me, and we thought it could be something else. And ul -  timately, I did a block as best as I could of the stylohyoid ligament, basically recreating a  botched inferior alveolar nerve block. And that made all the symptoms go away. His chief  symptom was ringing in his ears. And when I did that, it made the ringing in the ears go  09 /01/25   Page   of 11   19

SSC 2.0 - 313: Enthesis Injections  away. And we did that multiple times. And I did it also with saline. So I did kind of a placebo  injection because I wanted to make gosh darn sure that this was the problem because he  was going to have to have that removed, basically.  [0:35:06]  The treatment for Eagle's syndrome with a calcified stylohyoid ligament is they go and they  cut it out, they take it out. And that's dangerous, of course. You have nerves in that area  and blood vessels, and it's not just some namby-pamby surgery. This is a big deal. So we  did anesthetic, we did saline, I did different lengths of long-acting anesthetics, marking  versus short-acting anesthetics, and everything was correct. I would never tell him what I  was doing other than we were going to do a shot there, and then I would say, okay, this  time did that seem to last longer, did it last less long, stuff like that, and he was always  consistent with what I had done. So ultimately I sent him back to the ENT, give that ENT all  that information, he had the stylohyoid removed, then he was fine. And all of that started  after trauma of an injection. Okay. Now, so with the side story on Eagle's Syndrome, let's  come back now to Ernest Syndrome, and going to be similar presentations. So as I put  down here on the slide, it's rare, but underreported, because people don't know to look.  Pain Originates from the Insertion..   [ 0:36:15]  Okay. Pain originates from the insertion of the stylomandibular region, radiates typically  into the temple, down the neck, or into the jaw joint. Now, go back to the myofascial pain,  the trigger points one, and that's going to look really similar to posterior digastric, and  these are basically the same area. So posterior digastric muscle, stylomandibular liga -  ment, going to be really similar. The difference here is the digastric doesn't attach to the  mandible, the digastric goes through and goes through a little slip and then goes up into  here, and we have our anterior digastric and our posterior digastric. Okay. But it's not at -  taching, there's no enthesis from the digastric into the mandible. So when you push here,  and they're like, “yow”, now do that to yourself right now, and you should have a little bit of  a yow yourself. Why? Because that's where your parotid gland is. So you're pushing your  parotid gland, more than likely, against that bone, and it doesn't like it. So that kind of hurts  a little bit. So don't just be like, palpate, like, oh, ow, yeah, that's not comfortable. Okay.  That's not comfortable, that's not what we're looking for. It is like, yowch, jump sign, and  telling you, yeah, that's going into my ear, that's going into this other area.  Etiology   [0:37:42]  Etiology, back to injury, can be very common, maxillofacial trauma, extreme stretching of  the ligament, so opening their mouth really wide, stuff like that, that can cause this syn -  drome. And again, typically kind of traumatic in nature.  09 /01/25   Page   of 12   19

SSC 2.0 - 313: Enthesis Injections  Symptoms   [0:37:58]  Symptoms, pain at the angle of the mandible, as we said, and then this referred pain stuff,  ear, jaw, teeth, throat. And that's Eagle's syndrome, so don't get confused here, but Ea -  gle's syndrome, well, often they will say, it feels like there's something stuck in my throat.  Ernest syndrome, they will usually say, yeah, it kind of hurts in my throat. They typically  won't use that stuck in my throat description. Stuck in my throat description, make sure  you've got your cone beam CT there, you can see this on a pano. On the pano, you're just  going to see that they're elongated. On a cone beam CT, you're going to see where it is.  You'll be able to tell if it's stylomandibular or stylohyoid from the cone beam CT. Pano, you  could tell maybe, but a lot harder than on a cone beam CT. So just remember that. Eagle's  syndrome is more, there's something stuck in my throat, and Ernest syndrome is more, it  kind of hurts in my throat.  Diagnosis   [0:38:54]  Diagnosis, history of trauma, palpation of the insertion of the ligament. So put this picture  in because this guy clearly has a history of trauma. Diagnostic injection. Diagnostic injec -  tion is going to be the biggest one for Ernest syndrome. You're going to palpate. Other  stuff's not going to make sense. There's some trauma involved, and you're thinking, I think  this is it, we're going to inject.  Treatment   [0:39:18]  Treatment, similar to our other enthesis type of things, we have our injection therapy with  local anesthetic, maybe with a drop of steroid. We could give them systemic steroids if you  wanted to. We could do NSAIDs, cold pack, moist heat. Now, PRF, of course, is another  one that we're going to use here because of that injury, and any time there's an injury, I  want you to think PRF. As a matter of fact, with almost all injection therapies as of 2025,  PRF should be number one on your list. That should be the first thing you think about. Or  physical therapy, getting them to a physical therapist, something like that. Now, note, I also  put in here surgery, and I talked about that already with Eagle's syndrome, but similar with  stylomandibular ligament is if you are doing your injection therapies, you do your PRF, but  it keeps coming back, there's just some irritation there, it's just been hurt too much, then  they can go in and either block it with radiofrequency surgery. They go in and just basically  do a permanent lesion and burn the nerve in that area so it doesn't tell the brain that  there's pain there anymore.  09 /01/25   Page   of 13   19

SSC 2.0 - 313: Enthesis Injections  [0:40:31]  Again, just with my description right there, you're like, well, is that good to just kind of like  turn off the pain but not address the etiology of the pain? Usually not, but in this case,  probably fine, because there's nothing there that is getting worse over time. Infrared light  therapy, that's an interesting one, and we're using this a lot with sleep apnea patients now  to help them with their sleep. We're using it with TMJ problems. We're using it in conjunc -  tion with PRF. When you watch that video, infrared with PRF and splint therapy, boom,  boom, boom, we get quite the combination there, people getting better with that. Of  course, physical therapy is going to be appropriate in this one too. If you can't do PRF,  then you've always got the physical therapist that can go in. Now, you're going to need to  tell them, so Ernest syndrome is not something they would have learned in school. They  will be familiar with Eagle's syndrome probably, and that's a little bit of a no-go because if  you've got something there that's potentially going to cause other problems, they're not go -  ing to go digging around on it. With stylomandibular ligament or Ernest syndrome, you're  going to kind of explain to them where that is, and they could go in and do some manual  therapy, at least a session or two, and theoretically that could help.  [0:41:46]  Here's how we kind of find it and then inject it. This first picture, this is just the palpation of  where you're going right there at the angle of the mandible, and then here is a picture of  them giving the injection. Then I got some pictures of my own here. This is just on the dry  skull, and then here is on Jenny. You can do this just with your finger palpating there, par -  ticularly if you can kind of see their mandible, then that makes it easier. An even easier  way is to use a tongue depressor, press that into their neck, exposing that angle of the  mandible, and then you just go right in. You're not going to go very far. You're going to  bonk that bone. If you're not bonking the bone, then it could be, to back up a couple slides  here, it could be that you are on the inside of the mandible, so you've slid in to the medial  of the mandible. That could be okay for a diagnostic injection, but therapeutic, you're trying  to hit it. On a therapeutic injection, you're trying to bonk that bone. Part of your therapeu -  tics is causing inflammation, causing trauma on purpose. This is one of the reasons that  PRF is kind of awesome for that, is if we go in and go smack, smack, smack with our nee -  dle, we're causing inflammation, and then right at the same time, we're putting everything  that the body needs there to make it better. That's why I prefer PRF over other stuff that  we've done in the past.  Greater and Lesser Occipital Neuralgia   [0:43:18]  Now let's talk about greater and lesser occipital neuralgia. And quoting here from "Bonica's  Management of Pain" occipital neuralgia is characterized by pain in the suboccipital region  and in the back of the head. A large number of patients have muscle tension headaches in  the same distribution, but few of these patients have a true neuralgic pain. It's not really a  09 /01/25   Page   of 14   19

SSC 2.0 - 313: Enthesis Injections  neuralgia. What it is, we believe, is you see the occipital muscles have these attachments,  enthesis, to the back of the skull, and that these nerves are irritated around those attach -  ments. So not a true neuralgia, but it's still going to be called occipital neuralgia. So if you  palpate back there, and there's some very kind of specific spots where this is, and there's  little depressions. And if you find that depression on yourself, and you push, it aches, and  that's because you're on a nerve. So if you move your finger to the side of the depression  and push, it won't feel the same. If you're in a little divot, and that's where that nerve is  coming out, if you're in that little hole, that little divot, either for the greater or the lesser,  and you push and you feel a little ache, that's because you're on the nerve. It'd be similar if  you did supraorbital, right there, that's a little bit of an ache. Or if I did infraorbital, I'm going  to get that little ache. That's what you're going for when you're palpating. You just kind of  palpate around in that area.  Another Definition - Symptoms   [0:44:49]  Here's another definition of occipital neuralgia that also brings in the idea of it having re -  ferred pain along the distribution of that nerve. The big one that I see with this though, and  that I want you to kind of think of with occipital neuralgia is pain or pressure behind the  eyes. And by the way, I don't think I've said this yet, with the enthesis type of problems, but  I've said this before with TMJ problems in general, usually unilateral. That doesn't mean  that people aren't going to say they're bilateral, but usually they're unilateral. And people  who say they're bilateral, if you ask them which side is worse, they will almost always have  a side that's worse. And that's one of the fun things about diagnostic injections is people  can kind of say, yeah, it hurts on both sides, but it hurts the most here. And then you give  them a shot, and then they're like, the pain's all gone.  [0:45:46]  Sometimes there's sympathy pain that they're kind of picking up on the other side, and ac -  tually there's nothing there. So it's kind of sympathy pain. If you've ever experienced that in  your mouth, for example, if you have a canker sore, sometimes your whole mouth hurts,  not just in the area where the canker sore is, and you're intellectually, you're like, well, that  doesn't make any sense, but you just kind of have this overall pain. Or if you have a  headache, you can kind of narrow down where it hurts, but kind of your whole head hurts.  So that's the same thing with this, but just put in your mind there, like I told you with tem -  poral tendonitis, I said ear pressure, and they say the word pressure. This one is, it hurts  behind my eye. We're not going to do a diagnostic injection behind the eye. Don't worry  about that. But pressure or pain behind my eye, think back here. By the way, pressure or  pain in my forehead, think occipital as well. So occipital tends to refer to the front of the  head. Okay. So symptoms, occipital pain, it's rarely their chief complaint. It's usually this  pain behind the eye.  [0:46:54]  09 /01/25   Page   of 15   19

SSC 2.0 - 313: Enthesis Injections  Quick story on this one. Had a patient once that we figured this out for her and she worked  in an office. It's possible that some forward head posture would irritate these nerves. And  roughly about every four to six months, she would come in and she would know right  where it was after we had done the shots a couple times. And it was kind of funny, but she  would literally circle it with a pen, like a ballpoint pen. She would go back and she'd be like,  that's the spot. And she would like make a circle and come in and she'd already kind of  had X marks the spot for us. And we'd do the shot. She would feel immediately better. And  then she would do well for months after. We would typically do marcaine with a drop of  steroid and that would get her another four to six months. She did do some physical thera -  py that helped, but just because of the nature of her business and her head posture, that  kept coming back. Does that sound familiar? Does that seem to be something that could  also happen with you as a dental professional? You sure bet it could. So these kinds of  things with head posture, very common in dental professionals. Watch for this in your staff.  Probably if you ask your staff after learning this, do any of you have kind of pain in the  back of your head? Sometimes it feels like it's behind your eye. It would not be uncommon  for you to have at least one staff members like, oh yeah, I have that all the time.  Radiation of Pain   [0:48:18]  Okay. Radiation of pain to the parietal, temporal, zygomatic and frontal areas. Pain and  pressure behind the eyes. Photophobia, pain radiation in the ear, shoulder, and sometimes  arm. Okay. So a lot of referred pain going on here. Photophobia, meaning they don't like  bright lights, is another hallmark of this. Not everybody has these things, but when you  hear these sort of super weird symptoms, it's like, yeah, I got to wear sunglasses all the  time, this hurts so bad. Weird, right? Nuts. Okay. Think occipital neuralgia when you hear  that kind of stuff. Okay. So here we have our lesser occipital nerve kind of marked there.  Lesser occipital nerves on the lateral and the greater occipital nerve is on the more medial.  And you're going to palpate those. In my experience, the lesser, the one that's closer to  your ear, is a little bit more commonly affected. And that's possibly because there's bigger  muscles there, so to speak. Well, I don't know if I should say it that way. I don't know if I  should say bigger muscles because the trapezius muscle is a pretty darn big muscle. But  we have our sternocleidomastoid here, splenius capitis. We have a bunch of muscles right  there. And right in that area, I think that just is a prominent area for people to get that  tweaked for whatever reason. And just in my experience, when you palpate, that tends to  be it.  [0:49:44]  I'll turn around here. So right here where my finger is, right there. And if you palpate on  yourself too, that's there. The greater, there's not quite as much of a bump. I know my  speaker or my microphone is not going to pick me up as well. So, I'll talk a little louder  here. But there's a little bump here, a little depression rather than a bump. I apologize. It's  09 /01/25   Page   of 16   19

SSC 2.0 - 313: Enthesis Injections  a depression. I think I may have said bump before, so it's a depression there that my fin -  ger's fallen into. Try that on yourself and you should find that. Okay. So greater occipital,  lesser occipital, as I mentioned before.  Diagnosis   [0:50:18]  Diagnosis, we got that history of trauma. Again, this should be getting repetitious at this  point because they're all kind of the same. You palpate as mentioned and then diagnostic  injection is going to be the big one. And usually pretty effective. If your diagnosis is right  and you give them a little bit of carbocaine there as a diagnostic injection, they're going to  feel better. And they're going to feel better almost immediately. And it does tend to be a  whatever it is to zero kind of diagnostic injection. It's not like, it's a little bit better. When this  is it, you get it. Treatment, this is going to be the same stuff as all the other enthesis prob -  lems. So it can be just the long-acting anesthetic. It could be some medications or what  they're going to be put on by their medical doctors. We're not going to use any of that stuff  because it's not a gabapentin deficiency or something like that.  [0:51:11]  Again, this is from a medical textbook that we have down here in neurology is why that's  on that list. For us, it's going to be just be more treatment like normal and of course PRF.  Okay. Note also there the avoid forward head posture stuff. So, theoretically this might be  something that we see more than we used to. I don't talk about head posture much. For  some of you that came from different schools of thought that might bug you even. That it's  like, yeah, why doesn't Jamison ever talk about forward head posture? And the reason I  really don't talk about it much is this was talked about my whole career, which predates the  iPhone. So when I graduated dental school, I didn't have a cell phone. I had a beeper in  1996 when my wife was pregnant with the twins, and I'd run out and call her from the  phone that was out in the hall. So it was not, you know, iPhone was a long ways down the  road. And you may remember those days. If forward head posture was the thing that  everybody claimed that it was, then every person on planet Earth should have a TMJ prob -  lem because all they do now is do this all day long.  [0:52:44]  Up until the invention of the iPhone, yeah, some people had a little bit of forward head  posture. Now, everyone has forward head posture. So frankly, just don't buy it. There's not  been an epidemic of everyone on planet Earth having these cervical problems that a lot of  people talk about. So I was just talking actually to a colleague today about that, a regener -  ative medicine doctor who heard someone talk about that and made a big deal about the  cervical problems and things like that and those contributing to TMJ problems. I'm not say -  ing that they can't, and I used the exact same example with him. I'm like, well, if that was  true, then everyone would have a problem because everyone is spending way more time  looking at their iPhone than they used to. Now, on the other hand, you could make a case  09 /01/25   Page   of 17   19

SSC 2.0 - 313: Enthesis Injections  there that's like, well, all right, Jamison, let's use your own analogy there. Couch to 5K ver -  sus trained athlete. Maybe they don't have those problems because they've trained them -  selves now for 15 years of having that forward head posture. They've built up to it, they're  fine, and then we only see it when someone has trauma or something like that. I'll buy that.  [0:53:52]  Okay. Back to occipital neuralgia though. As of 2025 and beyond, I think PRF is going to  be your treatment. Not scared of using steroids in this area. It's different. So I hate the idea  nowadays of using steroids in the jaw joint because I know, I don't think, I know it's going  to break it down. I don't think it's going to. I know it's going to because I've done it. Okay.  I've had plenty of patients over the years that we've done steroids and it broke down the  TMJ, sometimes really significantly. Now, they didn't have pain, which is all they cared  about, but I cared about more than just their pain. I cared about their structural integrity. So  we do not do steroid injections in the jaw joint as a rule anymore. PRF, we do. However,  these tendon insertions, these synthesis and stuff, I'm not quite as worried about it of stick -  ing a steroid there. So, if my family member had something and I happened to have anes -  thetic and steroid there and I didn't have super easy access to the centrifuge and stuff like  that, I would not be adverse to doing a drop of steroid and some anesthetic to help get  someone out of pain in a ligamentous attachment or a tendinous attachment. However, as  soon as I could get to that centrifuge or get them to someone that could do this, I would.  So PRF is always going to be number one on my list for this.  Treatment   [0:55:28]  Treatment with our anatomical considerations, there's really nothing to be scared of there.  You just palpate there with your finger and that's right where you're going to go. Obviously,  you're not going to go very deep. There's not much there until you're smacking the bone.  When you do this too, they will usually feel it as in, whoa, that's like right behind my eye  and that'll kind of reinforce that you're in the right spot. There are other things that can be  done here like the pulse radiofrequency ablation. If you did this, did it multiple times, it kept  coming back. This is another one just like with Ernest syndrome that you could work with a  pain management doctor or the people that do this and they would go in and burn that  nerve and that would give the patient pain relief and is really not necessarily doing some -  thing harmful for them long term because it's a kind of just a weird response to something  else, but there's nothing structural in that area that's going to be a problem.  [0:56:26]  So I wouldn't worry about that too much. Cryoneuroablation is the same thing, just using  cold. Just some more of that anatomy there. We see that there's a lot of muscles from the  back and neck that are attaching to this area and it's possible that you could strain, and  notice I use the word strain there. So with the tendon, you could strain any of these mus -  cles and they could pull in that occipital area and that could irritate those nerves and it's  09 /01/25   Page   of 18   19

SSC 2.0 - 313: Enthesis Injections  not just the trapezius, it's not just the sternocleidomastoid, it's not just these muscles.  There's a lot going on there. So anybody that has kind of a whiplash type of injury that they  could get from far more than just a car accident, for sure be palpating back there. This is  an area that normally does not hurt at all. So if you find that spot and you're up on bone  and you push into that little depression like we talked about and they're like, yeah, that  hurts and yep, that's right behind my eye. That's where my pain is. Okay. That's what  you're gonna be looking for.  [0:57:29]  And here's a picture of us giving that injection using a medical syringe. You feel free to use  a dental syringe here if you want. If you're doing PRF, usually use a medical syringe too. A  little different on the hands here. I would have my hand like kind of more similar to what  they're doing here on the greater occipital nerve block where he's got his finger there and  kind of giving him the target, although the needle is well below that. I would have my fin -  ger, you basically push on that depression and hold that and then I just move my finger a  little up and out of the way, so I go right to that spot. Very easy. This is a simple one to  teach you. You're going to think that it's a little bit crazy to stick a needle in the back of  somebody's head. It's really not. This is probably the easiest injection that we ever do. It's  darn hard to miss, and if your diagnosis is right, the patient is going to be tremendously  better right then.  [outro music]  09 /01/25   Page   of 19   19

