SSC 2.0 - 315: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 2  SSC 2.0   Level 3  315: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 2  [intro music]  What About PRF Injections?   [0:00:12]  What about our PRF injections? Here, obviously, a picture in the jaw joint, but is there data  that this could also be helpful for myofascial trigger points? And sure enough, there is. This  is covered in the section on PRF, but just to kind of go through the scan and to go through  this study here, 50 adult patients participate in the study, randomly divided into two groups.  First group received one milliliter lidocaine injections to trigger point in the master muscle.  Now, that's a lot. I've never, ever, never, ever, ever, never, ever, ever inject a milliliter of  anesthetic when I'm doing a trigger point injection. When we do the trigger point injection,  you're going in, you're trying to get that local twitch response, and then once you do, you  deposit a few drops of anesthetic. I don't know what these people were thinking, put in a  whole milliliter. Obviously, their thinking, it has to do with what they're injecting. Take this  study with a grain of salt, because it doesn't say diddly about local twitch response and  stuff like that. I'm not even sure that the people who were doing this knew what the heck  they were doing.  [0:01:21]  Based on just that comment that we're like blowing in a CC of fluid of anesthetic in this  case, that's weird. Normally, we would not do that. The second group, they got one milliliter  of platelet-rich growth factor injections, PRGF. Again, if you haven't watched the PRF lec -  ture yet, there's PRP, platelet-rich plasma, PRGF, platelet-rich growth factor, and PRF,  platelet-rich fibrin. Those are different things. Those are all different things, and go into that  PRF lecture and kind of learn those different things, though. When we're looking at litera -  ture, I kind of look at all of it as the same, so to speak. If I see something, it's like, oh, PRP  worked on that, I'm going to think, well, PRF's going to work too. Oh, PRGF is what they  used here, well, PRF's going to work too. PRF is what they used here, well, probably PRP  would work. The reason for PRF is we don't have an anticoagulant in it, so typically, rule of  thumb, if you see the PRP or PRGF worked, PRF is likely to work even better.  [0:02:30]  All right, they measured the patient's pain by visual analog scale, kind of slipping down  there to the four-week mark. Four weeks after the procedure, patient's average pain in the  lidocaine group was 3.4 on a 0 to 10 scale, which is pretty high, and it was 0.9 in the  PRGF group.   Bottom line, the PRGF group was better than lidocaine. Now, frankly, if I  imagine, 'cause again, remember, we're always dealing with averages or means, bell  curve type of stuff here, I'm pretty confident that they would have had patients that re -  09 /01/25   Page   of 1   13

SSC 2.0 - 315: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 2  sponded really well with the, quote, lidocaine injections, because the person doing it hit the  trigger point, got a local twitch response, and the lidocaine was just there for fun to have  that post-injection soreness improved, and they just did great. And then others, they  missed.  [0:03:29]  With the PRF group, here's the question on this that I have, and that is, if you miss the lo -  cal twitch response, if you miss the loci of the trigger point, but you put in PRF, can the  body just go in and heal the trigger point? I think maybe it can. So that is a check in the  positive column for PRF, is maybe you don't have to be as good. Maybe you can kind of  get it in the general area, and it's going to work pretty well, even if you don't hit the actual  trigger point. Now, I would make a case for you would still want to try to figure out what the  etiology of the muscular trigger point is, but again, if you have a choice between dry  needling, using anesthetic, or PRF, and it was your family member, I would jump to PRF.  [0:04:28]  Another study kind of found the same thing. So here was PRP compared to dry needling.  Visual analog scale again, checked them at two weeks, one month, and three month fol -  low-ups, and then again at six months. Going straight to the result there, the use of PRP  solution in myofascial trigger points had a better effect on pain and patient satisfaction  compared to dry needling. So comparing just the needle itself versus the PRP, PRP did  better. Once again, for me and my family, now I had this treated with some dry needling  and with some manual therapy, but I was thinking about going in and doing PRF. Why did  I, for my arm, why did I go to the physical therapist first? It was just a little more conve -  nient. I would have had to go to my office and have my team draw my blood and stuff. Ac -  tually, we're thinking about, and probably by the time you watch this, we will have this.  [0:05:27]  My family has literally said when they kind of come over for dinner and stuff like that, hey  dad, we should have a centrifuge here at the house so that if any of us have problems, we  should just have all the stuff here and then Allie, Jack's wife, who worked at my office, she  was trained in phlebotomy, she could do the blood draw, spin it up, have PRF for our own  uses amongst our family members.   That's a pretty good idea. So if I would have had that  where I just had to go into the other room and draw blood, spin it, stick it into myself, I  probably would have done that. I went actually to the physical therapist for another reason,  which was I wasn't positive what the pain was from.  [0:06:07]  I had read there's something called a brachial tunnel syndrome, which is kind of like carpal  tunnel, but actually, excuse me, radial tunnel syndrome. And it's like when you're turning a  screwdriver, it's that causes the pain, like turning your hand like that. And I thought, well, it  could be that. Sometimes neck pain can give you pain somewhere else. Like sometimes  neck pain is actually what's the carpal tunnel syndrome. It's nothing to do with down here.  It's up here in their neck. So I really trust the physical therapist I work with. I wanted her to  check it out and figure out where it came from and in her treatment, she did spend the vast  majority of her time right here, but also did stuff up in my neck.  09 /01/25   Page   of 2   13

SSC 2.0 - 315: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 2  [0:06:51]  Okay, anyway, bottom line is PRP, PRF, PRGF. PRF is what we're going to use. Very, very  good for this and might get you a little bit of a bonus localized healing. Whereas my  thought process with the dry needling or the hypodermic needle is we are, especially if we  hit the trigger point, we're causing a healing cascade. We're traumatizing the area. We're  going in there and messing it up. And then the body's like, oh, messed up. I got a cut in  here. I've got trauma in here. Let's fix it. With the PRF injection, obviously causing trauma  with the needle and then putting in all the stuff to heal it at the same time. That makes a lot  of sense to me.  Trigger Point Injection Technique - Position   [0:07:41]  Let's talk now about the trigger point injection technique. Our goal again is to smack that  trigger point, hit that taut band. Position the patient in a recumbent position. You don't have  to, but that's just kind of all injections. Why do we do that is so they don't, they're less likely  to pass out. I've never had somebody pass out or feel faint with a trigger point injection. I'm  sure that people do. I just don't ever remember having a patient do that. Whereas with the  jaw joint, I've had multiple patients feel a little bit faint and woozy afterwards and we tren -  delenburg them and they're fine. I've never had a patient, knock on wood, actually pass  out. Trigger points, I've never had that happen. But again, just not a bad idea to lay them  down.  Select a Needle   [0:08:25]  Select a needle that allows for proper depth and touch. Okay, most dentists really dig the  30 gauge needle. I don't like 30 gauge needles as much for a couple of reasons. Just you  don't have the same feel as a 30 gauge needle. And also since it's less stiff, remember  that these needles are beveled. When you push it in, it's going to move depending on how  that bevel is. Whereas a 27 gauge is less to deflect. So 30 gauge is going to not be exactly  where you think it is because of that deflection. A 27 gauge will be more straight. 25 gauge  is going to be super duper straight. Now we're talking like bigger cores on a bigger needle.  I don't tend to use 25 gauge. 27 is my needle of choice. I use 27 for everything. For joint  injections, all the injections that we talk about outside the deep dark hole, I'm a 27 gauge  needle guy.  Palpate and Fix   [0:09:21]  09 /01/25   Page   of 3   13

SSC 2.0 - 315: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 2  Palpate and fix the trigger point. Meaning with your other hand, you're going to kind of pal -  pate, find it, and then you go on each side of it. I palpate it with this finger and then I typi -  cally go with my other fingers and I know where I'm going. When we're going in with the  needle, we're going to try to hit it. And so you are palpating with your fingers. They stay  there. And then you go in with your needle and you're going for that twitch. Once you get  the twitch, you're done. Once you get the twitch, you're done. If you're going to shoot some  carbocaine, then you just take a couple drops of, drop a couple drops of carbocaine and  that's it. You're out. And then I rub it, stretch it out and do that kind of post trigger point in -  jection stuff. Again, palpate, fix it, hit it. Once the trigger point is encountered, you will get  that local twitch response as shown on the video here.  [0:10:13]  [video playback]  You'll see that muscle twitch, twitch. And then you're kind of done. Now this video is going  to be on a loop and it's going to, you're going to see a twitch over and over again. You  don't need to go multiple twitches. You're just going for that one twitch really. And then  you're going to inject anesthetic if you want to. Now note again, and this is all from Trav -  ell's textbook again. After the local twitch response or a pain response or referral is noted  by the patient. If you're like, the patient's like, “Whoa, that's it.” “Hey, that goes up the side  of my head.” “Hey, that goes into my tooth.” Even if you don't get the local twitch response,  you can deposit some anesthetic right there. Just a little bit, 0.1, 0.2 milliliters, not that one  milliliter like they did in that crazy study. But I want to get that twitch response whenever  possible. I don't always get it, but probably going to be ineffective if I don't get it. I try to get  it.  [0:11:03]  But if the patient's like, “oh, that's it” then I'm still trying to get that twitch response, but then  I'm going to inject anesthetic right there. Typically, you will see that that anesthetic injection  will also give them that pain relief in the referred area. Muscles should be stretched after  the injection, massaged out, kind of like I'm doing that with my hand, like kind of rub it out  and really stretch it out, rub it out. That'll feel good to the patient too. You've done just a  couple other pictures here with the masseter, kind of go in, fix it, and temporalis. You note  that the fingers are over the blood vessels here. That's not necessarily that it's going to be  a massive problem if we inject the blood vessel. It's just the trigger point is not the blood  vessel and an artery probably would give you a little bit of a twitch if you hit it since there's  muscles in the arterial walls, but that's not what you're going for. So you kind of palpate  those arteries and fix them, make sure that you're going in between them, that you're not  actually going to hit the arteries.  [0:12:05]  Now don't inject these please. I don't want you to inject the lungs. Knock on wood, I have  trained hundreds if not a thousand people in trigger point injections. Between me and the  courses we do in Spencer Study Club, it's got to be over a thousand at this point of den -  tists who have learned how to do trigger point injections from me and my colleagues in  Spencer Study Club. Knock on wood, but I don't ever know of anybody who has perfed a  09 /01/25   Page   of 4   13

SSC 2.0 - 315: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 2  lung, caused a pneumothorax with this, but you could. So don't and you just need to follow  a couple kind of obvious things. You need to always know where is your needle. Where is  your needle? Okay, this is where's Waldo if you're not familiar with the where's Waldo stuff.  So where is your needle? Well I can kind of look on here and actually there's Waldo. Wal -  do's way up there in the corner. Where's the needle? Oh, the needle is hiding down there  to the left. You may not have noticed the needle 'cause it had on the eye and the fake nose  there. Okay, little joke there. Always know where your flipping needle is and where the end  of that is.  [0:13:23]  So if you're treating, the only way you're going to perf the lung is in the trapezius area and  if you're getting much down below that, you're going into the intercostal areas of the ribs,  I'd punt if I were you. This is about as low as I'll go is this area of the anatomy. Now as a  dentist, and this is in Jeff Okeson's textbook, he shows trigger points in the trap and the  trap goes way the heck down the middle of your back. So are you okay going down there?  Probably, but I just get a little bit nervous. So I will treat areas, I will treat this area, and by  the way, let me give you a little best practices here. 'Cause even this right here can start to  get potentially uncomfortable for a male doctor to treat a female patient.  [0:14:22]  What we do in our practice is we have our female staff members find the trigger points on  our female patients and they mark them with a surgical marker. They mark them and then  the doctor comes in, the female assistant stays in there with us, and then we do the trigger  point injections. And then after we've done the injections, then the female assistant comes  back and rubs out the muscle and stretches it with the patient and all that kind of stuff.  Okay, so just a best practice there. There have been a few dentists get in trouble over the  years that were doing trigger point injections. Now they were doing them in different spots  than they probably should have, but just don't go there where someone could be like, what  the flip were you doing?  [0:15:08]  But with the trapezius, back to the trapezius here and not causing a pneumothorax, we're  going to palpate. So you're palpating flat, but then you're going to pull up the muscle. So  you're going to palpate flat, find that nodule, and then I'm going to pinch it up and then I'm  going to go there and I'm going to know where my needle is. I'm going to know that I've  pinched up that and I know how long the needle is, how far it's going in. And this is, I men -  tioned this at the very beginning of the lecture here, myofascial. You're often, and particu -  larly in the trapezius, but you are often going to go in and you're going to get a local twitch  response and you're only like two millimeters on the skin.  [0:15:53]  You know that the skin and little fat layer there is thicker than that. You're not even in the  muscle yet. And it's like, whoop, twitch. You don't have to then go into the muscle and dig  around. You're like, I got it. That's it. I got that local twitch response. Local twitch response  is what I want you to have. If you post onto the Facebook group, “Hey everybody, I'm do -  ing trigger points on this patient. That's not really seeming to help. I'm thinking about going  09 /01/25   Page   of 5   13

SSC 2.0 - 315: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 2  to Botox. What do you think?” I'm going to put, did you get a local twitch response? It's not  about what you shot. It's about, were you there? Were you in the right spot? Did they even  have a trigger point in that area? Or are you just kind of going into their skin for the fun of  it? Yeah, maybe it hurt when you palpated in there. Maybe that's 'cause you palpated too  hard.  [0:16:35]  Be clear on your diagnosis. But once again, it's not about what you inject. It's how you in -  ject. Don't perf the lungs, pull that up between your fingers, and then you can go. And  you're always going to know where the tip of that needle is. “Pull out, Betty, pull out, you've  hit an artery”. You're not going to hit an artery, don't worry about that, particularly in the  trapezius area. Just a little fun joke there. I had you all excited to do this injection outside  the deep dark hole. And then I go and I put in this far side about hitting an artery and now  you're probably freaked out again.  Contraindications to Trigger Point Injections   [0:17:10]  Well, speaking of being freaked out, let's talk about some of the contraindications to trigger  point injections. Active infection over the side of the trigger point. I've never seen that in my  life. But if it was pretty clear that they were infected, obviously don't do that. Patient re -  fusal, that's a pretty good reason. Local open skull defect, yeah, not going to be doing that  either. Trigger point not safely accessible by the needle, cool. Poorly controlled psychiatric  disorder, makes sense. History of keloid formation, all right. Severe fibromyalgia. So again,  you see where this was brought from on the contraindications. You're never going to see  any of these indications, or you're never going to see any of these contraindications rather,  except maybe that last one. That fibromyalgia deal, really the more important part of that is  that they hurt all over the place. And oftentimes people with fibromyalgia, it also travels. It's  not always in the same spot. That's a different animal than typical myofascial trigger  points. And really focusing on their sleep and things like that, making sure they're getting  deep sleep. You remember from the sleep lectures that if you don't get deep sleep, your  body doesn't heal itself well. And oftentimes people with fibromyalgia will have that. Those  are some of the contraindications.  [0:18:30]  Continued, patients on anticoagulation therapy. How come? Well, because they would  bleed. If the patient's taken aspirin within three days of injection, same reason as the last.  Tobacco smokers, unless they've stopped smoking and have taken at least 500 milligrams  of time-release vitamin C for three days prior to injection. I don't know about you, but I  don't actually see a lot of smokers. But if you did have a smoker and you were going to do  trigger points, then just tuck that away. I know we don't see a lot of smokers nowadays,  unless they work at hospitals. I don't know why, but I always see people standing outside  09 /01/25   Page   of 6   13

SSC 2.0 - 315: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 2  the hospital smoking that are in scrubs. Freaks me out. But hospital employees, maybe a  nurse you're treating that is a smoker.  [0:19:13]  But if they are, then that's a good thing to do because it's going to help with the healing.  Patients who are very scared of needles. Okay, so here's your words for the day that you'd  never heard of before. Belonophobia, intense irrational fear of needles, including hypo -  dermic needles, pins, and other pointed objects. And then we have another one that's just  specifically for medical procedures. Trypanophobia, and that's fear of needles used in  medical procedures such as injections, vaccines, and blood draws. So if someone's  freaked out about needles, then maybe you can't do this. Maybe they're not scared of acu -  puncture needles. Acupuncture needles are pretty awesome. Again, encourage you to  learn how to do that, and you might learn that at a Spencer Study Club event.  Best Practices   [0:20:00]  Some best practices, never aim at an intercostal space. I'm going to tell you probably don't  even go there. If you are getting to the point where you're like, hmm, I'm wondering where  the ribs are here so that I can kind of get in between the ribs, I wouldn't do that if I were  you. Now, you may be a Spencer Study Club member that's in a foreign land. You're out -  side of the United States. Maybe you're a medical doctor. Well, that's a different story. But  if you're a dentist, I want you to kind of stay in the head-neck area. If they've got problems  that are down lower than here, then get them to someone else. It's going to be covered by  their insurance anyway.  [0:20:38]  Avoid injecting into the hub in the needle. Why? Well, because you don't want to break it  off. That'd be another sucky day is that you go in deep in the trap there, they flinch, and  pop, off goes the needle. Okay, that sucks. They're going to the ER, and that's going to be  a really bad day. That's almost as bad a day as I pop their lung, and they have a pneu -  mothorax. Now, don't wig out when I say stuff like that 'cause if you do it the way I teach  you and you take the course from us and learn how to do it, you're never, ever, ever going  to have those problems. Sometimes in our courses, though, we will see people and they  won't follow the rules. They'll palpate, and you'll see them, instead of pulling up the flesh in  the trapezius, they'll push it down, and then they'll go in with the needle. Oh, dang, I hope  that's not a really thin woman that's got the lobe of the lung right up there. So be smart,  and you will not have a problem.  [0:21:33]  Avoid side pressure on the needle. This is the exact same reason as the last one, is we  don't want to break the needle off. Replace the needle that's hit bone, and that's mostly  just because you've then bent the needle a little bit on the tip, and then that's going to  traumatize the muscle. Now, we're going to talk about enthesis injections on another lec -  09 /01/25   Page   of 7   13

SSC 2.0 - 315: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 2  ture here, and that one you're going to hit the bone on purpose, but I typically, I'll give a  little bit of a tap-tap on the bone, and that's also to kind of cause this healing process. I  think we're gonna use PRF in those cases rather than just our typical needle and anesthet -  ic because the PRF is going to cause a healing response much, much faster than you just  going in and traumatizing it and letting the body do that all on its own without the awesome  stuff PRF's gonna bring.  Complications   [0:22:21]  Here's some of the complications that can occur with trigger point injections. I've covered  all of these on the other slides here, so you can just kind of pause the video for a second  to read this, but we've covered this in the other ones. Again, don't worry too much about  these complications, just be smart, use the proper technique as you've been trained to do,  and you will not have these problems. I've given thousands of trigger point injections. My  partners have given thousands of trigger point injections. Again, we've never had any of  these negative side effects, knock on wood, no pneumothorax, no problems like that.  Again, I've never had a patient even faint, which you would think you would just because  of needle shock, so to speak, but really not a thing.  11 Reasons TRP Injections Fail   [0:23:03]  All right, so in conclusion here, let's wrap up with 11 reasons, this is from Travell's textbook  again, 11 reasons trigger point injections fail.  Number 11   [0:23:12]  Starting with number 11. Patient doesn't do passive stretching exercises at home. So you  did your job, but then you gave them some exercises to do, and they don't. That is a rea -  son.  Number 10   [0:23:24]  Number 10, forgetting to have the patient perform active range of motion following injec -  tion. We want to massage it out, stretch it out right after the injection.  Number 9   [0:23:33]  09 /01/25   Page   of 8   13

SSC 2.0 - 315: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 2  Number 9, overlooking other active trigger points. So you got one that hurt, but you kind of  stopped as soon as you found one, oh, yep, that's it, and you just focused only on that  one, you didn't go anywhere else, then that person could, it's failed, like that area will be  better, of course, but there may be other areas or other trigger points in the area that you  did not treat, and so then those hurt. Sometimes you will figure that out 'cause you do the  whole point with one finger thing, and the person's like, yeah, I'm no better. It's like, okay,  point with one finger. They're like, “it hurts right here”. And you're like, you pointed here last  time. “I did? Okay, maybe I am better”. Sometimes it's just going to, you got to figure out  what that is. We do this also when I talk about diagnostic injections. That's what I do too,  where you hit point where it hurts the most, diagnostic injection, and sometimes people  literally will be like, hey, did that help at all? Zero, did that help a little bit? Before you said  your pain was a seven, zero is nothing, 10 is worse to imagine, what is it now? And they'll  say, “yeah, it's still a seven” Okay, point to where it hurts. And then they just pointed there,  and now they'll point here. And again, I won't contradict them, but I'll just be like, okay, so  that's a different spot now. I understand it's still hurting though, so let's do it again. And we  do that to try to figure out the site and the source of the pain.  Number 8   [0:25:04]  8, inadequate hemostasis followed by irritation due to local bleeding. So if you are using a  hypodermic needle and you've really gone to town, and they're kind of tenderizing the  muscle there, then that's going to cause a lot of bleeding. This is the reason, again, that  we get the local twitch response. We deposit our anesthetic, if that's what you're using,  and you get out. If you're using PRF, you would get the local twitch response. You would  give them that one cc of PRF, and then you're golden 'cause you're not going to have this  problem with that local bleeding 'cause you're in and out   quickly, but then also you've de -  posited the healing factors at the end.  Number 7   [0:25:41]  Number 7, injecting a solution with an irritating or allergenic bacteriostatic preservative,  such as sodium bisulfate. Sodium hyposulfate, less irritating. So in other words, using an  anesthetic that has a preservative. There are anesthetics, like Marcaine, for example, is  more myotoxic, and you might still use Marcaine for certain purposes, but just know that  that might irritate that muscle.  Number 6   [0:26:09]  09 /01/25   Page   of 9   13

SSC 2.0 - 315: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 2  Number 6, using a needle finer than 25 gauge. Again, this is from Travell's text, and having  the tip pushed aside by the trigger point. Okay, I mentioned that, right? So 30 gauge is go -  ing to go like, and 27 gauge is going to deflect a little. 25 gauge is basically not going to  deflect at all 'cause it's a big old harpoon. You probably don't even have any 25 gauge  needles. 27 is going to be good, but just remember you are going to get a little bit of de -  flection. Don't be a baby using the 30 gauge. I know lots of dentists like the 30 gauge, but  it's just going to deflect so much, and it could literally just bounce off the trigger point. Not  my words, that's Dr. Travell saying that. I believe her.  Number 5   [0:26:51]  Number 5, needling the vicinity of the trigger point, but actually missing the trigger point,  and you will not get a local twitch response if that's the case.  Number 4   [0:27:00]  Number 4, injecting the area of referred pain or tenderness, not actually the trigger point.  This air results in incomplete temporary relief. So if we go to the referred pain area, like the  tooth, and we inject there, they may be like, yeah, I think that feels better, and that's tough  to differentiate because of placebo effect, especially if you use anesthetic because they  feel numb. And if it hurt there, and now it feels numb there, then they're going to be think -  ing to themselves, well, I must feel better because that's numb there. Sometimes it's hard  to differentiate what's really happening and what the patient's telling you. So bottom line,  you need to try to find the actual source of the pain, the trigger point in this scenario here,  not the site where that referral is.  Number 3   [0:27:49]  Number three, injecting a latent trigger point, not the responsible active trigger point.  Again, more confusion here. So they could have a trigger point, but it's not active. It's not  the one actually, the reason that the person's having the pain. And you get that one, which  might give you a local twitch response, but it's not the one that's causing the pain that  we're trying to treat. Okay, rarely is that gonna happen, but it could.  Number 2   [0:28:13]  09 /01/25   Page   of 10   13

SSC 2.0 - 315: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 2  Number two, disregarding perpetuating factors like mechanical, nutritional, metabolic, psy -  chological, infection, infestations, et cetera, all sorts of stuff in chapter four. Okay, that just,  they just threw a big old blanket there over everything, 'cause basically they're saying, hey,  maybe it's not about the trigger point. Maybe this person has other problems going on, and  this is just one thing that they have going on, but you're not really covering everything.  That sounds a lot like when we're talking about sleep apnea, doesn't it? That we make it all  about the airway, all about the oral appliance, and we don't look at their metabolic disorder,  their metabolic disease, and all these other things that they have going on. We don't look  at their vitamin D deficiencies. We don't look at these other things. Okay, that's why I like  working with physicians. So anyway, little aside there, but that is a reason that this can fail  is we're just too myopic on, and well, it's gotta be a trigger point, and it probably failed  'cause I suck, and I didn't do it right.   That'd be kind of a dentist response to this. Well,  maybe there's a bigger picture.  Number 1 - Wrong Diagnosis   [0:29:19]  And number one, can you guess what number one is? Number one is you got the diagno -  sis wrong. You thought it was a trigger point. You thought it was referred pain. It wasn't.  Maybe it was the tooth, okay? Love this far sight. We should write that spot down. If you  don't see it, there's a arrow right up there on the woolly mammoth there, and they took that  dude down with that one little arrow, so they're pretty excited about that. Maybe they  should write that down.  [0:29:45]  Okay, in conclusion, let me give you a story, and I believe I gave you this same story in  level one, but it's probably been so long since you watched level one that you don't re -  member this story. Maybe you do, or maybe I didn't even give you that story. I'll just share  it with you anyway, whether I gave it to you before or not. And what happened is I had a  woman come in, and she had pain, and when I asked her to point with one finger to where  it hurt, she pointed to her first premolar area on the upper right in the air.   And in other  words, the tooth was not there, but she pointed to where the tooth used to be. And she's  like, “yeah, that's where it hurts”.  [0:30:35]  Okay, that's a check in the weird column, right? So she's pointing in the air to a tooth that  used to be there and saying that's where it hurts. Immediately, I think trigger point. Now let  me give you the background on this, and that is that this woman had a tooth there a few  years before this, and she had pain in that tooth. And she goes to her dentist, and she  says, it hurts here. And the dentist did his workup, and he thought that she needed a root  canal. And I don't want to blame the dentist there. I assume that he did his normal testing,  and maybe it didn't present completely normal, but this woman is very, very professional,  very well put together. Maybe he just believed her that it's like, hey, this is a little bit weird,  09 /01/25   Page   of 11   13

SSC 2.0 - 315: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 2  but I trust you that this is where you feel the pain is coming from. Let's try something. But  there was no cavity, there was nothing like that, but he did a root canal. And so he does a  root canal on the first premolar there, and the patient tells me in her history that she  seemed to feel a little better maybe for a day or two, but then she's like, you know what? I  think we got it wrong, doc. She goes back to him, and she's like, you know what? I think  it's the tooth behind it. I think it's the second premolar there. Like, she didn't say that term,  but that's what she was doing. She was pointing out to the second premolar. Root canal  number two. Then, a couple days later, she's like, no, that still hurts in that area.  [0:32:18]  At this point, the dentist is smart enough to be like, okay, I give up. I punt. There's some -  thing weird going on here. He sends her to an endodontist. The endodontist, as endodon -  tists will sometimes do, was able to see that the root canal was not perfect, so he retreats  the first premolar where the patient feels the pain, and that doesn't solve the pain. Then he  does an apicoectomy, and that doesn't solve the pain. Then they slick it. They pull the  tooth, and that doesn't cause the pain. Okay, at this point now, we're getting concerned  because obviously it can't be the tooth anymore 'cause the tooth's gone, and her husband  is a cardiac surgeon. So he's thinking, clearly, my wife has a tumor. And so he gets her in,  and they do a MRI, and they do a CAT scan, and they're looking for tumors, and there's no  tumors.  [0:33:18]  Now at this point, she's basically come to a crossroads, and she's told that she can go to  the TMJ guy, me, or she can go to psychiatrist 'cause it's in her head. She's crazy, right?  And that was a neurologist that told her that 'cause the neurologist couldn't find anything  wrong. Again, they'd done all the imaging. There's nothing going on, but she still has pain  in the area where her tooth used to be. So she comes in and sees me. Now, as a TMJ guy  or gal, sometimes we get to look like we're geniuses because people get funneled in to our  office. At this point, what all had been ruled out? Well, a tooth problem had been ruled out  'cause the tooth is gone.  [0:34:10]  A tumor had been ruled out 'cause she'd had MRIs and CTs. She'd also been put on some  different medications. None of these things had worked, which means the diagnosis was  all wrong. Had the diagnosis been right, it would have worked or they would have found  something. She comes in to me and literally right as soon as she points there, I'm like,  trigger point. So I palpate the, it's on the upper first premolar. So that could be the mas -  seter, upper masseter, but more than likely we're going to start with temporalis, right? I  palpate the temporalis and I find a spot and she's like, okay, yeah, that hurts. That's tender  right there. I hold it with my finger and I'm like, okay, does that seem to just stay right there  or does it go anywhere? And she's like, I feel that in that tooth area. I'm like, cool. Then I  get out the spray and stretch, spray the temporalis, have her open, spray, spray, spray,  open wide, spray, spray, spray, open wide, spray, spray, spray, open wide, relax, give it a  few seconds. And then I say, does that make that pain in the tooth area worse, better, or  no change? And she says, “it's gone”. I'm like, awesome. Then I get out my Travell as -  09 /01/25   Page   of 12   13

SSC 2.0 - 315: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 2  signments book and I show her the picture of the temporalis trigger point. And I say, this is  what you've got going on, I'm pretty sure. And she'd been dealing with this for quite some  time.  [0:35:52]  So this wasn't an acute problem and I decided to get her to a physical therapist who was  going to do manual therapy with his hands and treat that trigger point. And her husband  was with her and he was cordial. And then they left, went to the physical therapist and he  was less cordial with the physical therapist. When he gets to the physical therapist, the  husband says, okay, Jack is his name, “I know a lot of people in town think highly of this  Spencer guy, but I think he's full of baloney. There's no way that this is this myofascial trig -  ger point thing or whatever he said it was. My wife for sure has a tumor or something and  we need to get to the bottom of this. I don't want to screw around with this physical therapy  stuff. You got three appointments to get her all better and then we're done. Three appoint -  ments and then we're not spending any more time on this 'cause I'm sure that there's  something else going on.”  [0:36:56]  Well, lucky for me, it only took two appointments to get her all better. And later she came to  see me and she said, I'll never forget this. “Dr. Spencer, why did it take over two years for  this to get figured out?” It's not that I was any smarter than any of those other people who  had treated her. It's that she was funneled in, but it was also, you only know what you  know. You can only see what you know to look for and I need to look. Now, note, I didn't  even treat her. I didn't even do the injections and stuff. I decided that I wanted her to see  my physical therapist instead. Diagnosis is the key. The reason the treatment worked was  my diagnosis was right. The reason none of the other treatments worked is 'cause their  diagnosis was wrong. When in doubt, go back to that diagnosis. Do things to help you with  your diagnosis, but if your treatment is not going the way you expect it to, always go back  to, is my diagnosis correct?  [0:38:10]  All right, that does it for myofascial trigger points injections outside the deep dark hole. I  hope you enjoyed that. And again, think about incorporating PRF with this. As of 2025, this  is the best practice for trigger points too. Now, don't get me wrong, you can do the manual  therapy, the dry needling, all the stuff that we talk about in here. But if you are going to  stick a needle in somebody, if I was doing that on my wife, if Jenny had a trigger point, and  I'm going to stick a needle in her, that needle is going to have PRF in the syringe. That's  how I would do it. I hope you'll consider that too. All right, take care.  [outro music]  09 /01/25   Page   of 13   13

