SSC 2.0 - 402: Marketing that Works Part 2  SSC 2.0   Level 2  402: Marketing that Works Part 2  [intro music]  Direct-To-Consumer   [0:00:12]  Now, direct-to-consumer marketing can be done once we got a firm foundation. So make  sure your foundation is really firm, before you start going out and doing this next part that  I'm gonna talk about, 'cause you can really turn off your potential medical referrals be -  cause they're gonna see your billboard. They're gonna hear your radio ad, possibly.  They're going to see the TV thing. They're gonna see the Facebook ad maybe, 'cause  you're targeting people. And if they have an interest in sleep apnea online, they're probably  gonna see it. Once again, any advertising you do, think to yourself, what if the only person  who sees this is the main sleep doctor in town? Be really smart on this. So our target, as  we're spearfishing here, we're looking for people who tried CPAP and couldn't use it for  whatever reason, people that have been diagnosed and didn't even try CPAP. That's our  target. That's our target market. Like Inspire, they weren't just telling the world about get -  ting a good night's sleep. They were targeting CPAP. Now, why that is, is because the per -  son has already had a diagnosis. So the hoops that one has to jump through, have already  been jumped through.  [0:01:34]  They had a face-to-face with a physician that said a sleep study is indicated because of X,  Y, Z. They had a sleep study. They were found to have sleep apnea on that sleep study,  treatment was ordered. There was a prescription received, and they tried that treatment  CPAP, or they didn't, but all those other four things were done. If they tried CPAP, that also  means insurance paid for CPAP, probably. It's relatively rare for the person to go through  all those things, have such mild sleep apnea that it's not even indicated to treat, the doctor  wouldn't have prescribed it in the first place. So when you go after that target market,  they've jumped through all the hoops. So typically, all you need to do is like, all right,  you've already had all these things. Let's just get your doctor on the phone here. Hey, doc,  you know that the person's got sleep apnea. They've tried CPAP for X number of months,  whatever. Didn't work out for them. They'd like to try an oral appliance. We cool. And that  conversation, as I've talked about before, is with the primary care doctor. The primary care  doctor will be like, yep, most of my patients can't use their CPAP. That's a bummer. Go  ahead and let's try the oral appliance.  Direct Marketing Example   [0:02:42]  09/01/25   Page   of 1   18

SSC 2.0 - 402: Marketing that Works Part 2  So here's a couple example of direct-to-consumer marketing that are pretty good. Here's a  wife wanted billboard, and I'm sure that this worked for this gentleman who put that out  there. Here's a brilliant marketing piece. Well, to a degree, 'cause this is just a joke, I'm  pretty sure. But if it was brilliant, it would have had on there how to contact these people.  That's the world's worst ad. If there's no way to contact the people, but just still kind of fun -  ny. So here are some examples of direct-to-consumer marketing that we've used over the  years, including both billboards, direct mail, which can be very effective, by the way. So  direct mail is far from dead. As a matter of fact, even think about yourself when you go to  the mailbox nowadays. Some of you might be young enough that you don't even remem -  ber the world of junk mail. And we still get junk mail. But in today's world, most of us touch  every piece of mail. And it's almost like a nostalgia type of thing. That you're kind of looking  at that, and you're like touching and feeling it. And maybe you're interested, maybe you  aren't. And then you kind of put over here.  [0:04:02]  But it's not just like throw it in the trash instantly. There is a touching it, looking at it, moving  on. Whereas I get, and I'm sure you do too, dozens of emails a day that I never open. I just  look at the subject. I look at the sender of it. And I'm like, not interested. Click, click, click,  click, click, click, click, delete. Now, hopefully you wouldn't be an email that they would re -  ceive that's just click delete. If you did it right, and have the subject line correctly and they  know you and trust you, theoretically, they're gonna open your mail, your email that is. But  direct mail to your community that has no clue that you're there and that if they can't toler -  ate CPAP, and if they can't tolerate CPAP, you can help. This is really powerful to send that  out. So consider that. By the way, I've mentioned my sons, Jake and Josh, they can help  you with things like direct-to-consumer mails. So Every Door Direct Mail is called. This is  another one. So hope for those who can't use CPAP. And there's my name and stuff.  Here's another one we did.  [0:05:13]  Now this one, you got to be a little careful with, 'cause this picture isn't the most flattering  towards CPAP. Yes. So that one, that's right on the edge. This was after we had a really  good reputation, that we would do something like this. I would not have that be your first  thing that you're putting out there is the scary guy, the guy with the huge eyes here on the  CPAP mask, with the hose wrapped around his neck. Don't have that be your first thing  that you do in your community, because you could kind of turn off your sleep medical  community. We don't wanna do that. So you'll notice too, in all of these ads, we have the  same thing, even though they're different hands in every one of these pictures. And these  are a long time ago, by the way. So I mentioned that we don't do direct-to-consumer mar -  keting. We don't do Facebook ads. We don't do any of that stuff. You can see here, these  are like TAP 3 Appliances. I don't think they make that appliance anymore. So this is a long  time ago that we were doing these things to build up our practice.  [0:06:18]  And we knew that in our community, there were lots of people who had tried CPAP that  wouldn't even know that we exist. And so, rather than try to go to every doctor in town and  09/01/25   Page   of 2   18

SSC 2.0 - 402: Marketing that Works Part 2  figure out where these people are, and we know also, by the way, that a lot of these pa -  tients are men. Most men don't go to the doctor on a regular basis. So this was us going to  where the people are. The people were in their car driving down the road. So having a bill -  board or something like that made sense. But notice that in all of these pictures, there's a  hand holding the appliance. And someone that is used to CPAP, this is pretty darn appeal -  ing. Someone who knows what a CPAP mask is, and sees something like that that is in a  hand. So it's not just the appliance. It's the appliance in a hand. And that is showing how  small it is and how easy it is for them to use compared to this big old bulky machine.  Radio Advertisement   [0:07:13]  Here are some radio ads that we did over the years. And these are pretty awesome. And  direct marketing on radio, may also be really powerful where you live. The target market  that we have done radio ads with over the years, are sports fans. So typically in your town,  if you have a professional or a college sports team, there's gonna be a pretty big following  of that team. And radio is still something that's used. So you can reach out to that station  and you can have ads during those football games, basketball games, whatever. As a mat -  ter of fact, you can also oftentimes have the talent become a patient. And that's something  we did. So without getting HIPAA violation here, in one of the markets where we have a  practice, there's a sports announcer who is rather famous. Everyone would know who this  person is, because of that football team. And we were pretty confident that this guy would  have sleep apnea 'cause he was a big dude. And sure enough, he did. And once we got  him in the oral appliance, he really did well with it. So we had him doing personal ads from  his own experience. He was comfortable saying, hey, I found out I have sleep apnea. I  worked with Center for Sleep Apnea & TMJ. I got an oral appliance, changed my life,  changed my wife's life.  [0:08:42]  That was pretty cool. So that's something that may be available to you too, is working with  this talent at the radio station. Radio is not dead. This is still something that you can use.  And by the way, one of the cool things about even TV ads, billboards, things like that, is  way less people use stuff like that now. So it's way less expensive. Unless you're in a mar -  ket like Las Vegas or something where every billboard is owned by a casino or a lawyer,  and most of the advertising out there is bought by casinos and lawyers, then that one's  gonna be tough. That one, you're not gonna use those sorts of things. But in any town  USA, it's probably really affordable. And we have multiple members of Spencer Study  Club, part of our business league group, where I know exactly what they're doing with their  practice. And they're using things like that, TV, ask the expert doctor segments at their lo -  cal TV station, stuff like that. And it's been very, very profitable for them. Their return on  investment is very clear. And you be smart on this stuff. You make sure that you can track  it.  09/01/25   Page   of 3   18

SSC 2.0 - 402: Marketing that Works Part 2  [0:09:48]  Sometimes, you'll use a separate phone number so you can track it. Sometimes you'll  send them to a site so you can track it. But let's go ahead and listen to these different radio  ads here. And you can kind of see stuff that we've done in the past. And you are more than  welcome to basically cut and paste here, just swipe and deploy, we call this. Use these  same scripts if they appeal to you, modify them a little bit, and you could use these in your  community. And I can virtually guarantee you, they're gonna be effective just like they were  for us.  [1st radio playback]  Can You Afford a Divorce?   [0:10:16]  Mike’s Friend:   Hey Mike, can I crash on your couch for a few days?  Mike:   Sure, can I ask why?  Mike’s Friend:   Linda says my snoring has gotten so bad, either I go or she goes.  Mike:   I thought you took care of that with your CPAP machine.  Mike’s Friend:   I hate that thing. It hurts my face, I wake up with a dry mouth, so I don't  use it anymore.  Mike:   My doctor sent me to Dr. Lane & Associates. They have new oral devices for sleep  apnea, perfect for folks who are CPAP intolerant.  Mike’s Friend:   But I can't afford to pay for something else to help me sleep.  Mike:   Can you afford a divorce? Sleep apnea is serious, but the truth is, less than half of  CPAP patients use it regularly due to discomfort. Ask your doctor about Dr. Lane & As -  sociates today to find out more about oral devices for sleep apnea that are perfect for pa -  tients with CPAP intolerance. And the best part, your medical insurance may cover the ma -  jority of the expense.  Mike’s Friend:   Hey Mike, I'm out of the doghouse. My snoring is over after my visit to Dr.  Lane & Associates.  Mike:   That’s great. Can I crash on your couch for a few days?  Mike’s Friend:   Can I ask why?  09/01/25   Page   of 4   18

SSC 2.0 - 402: Marketing that Works Part 2  Mike:   I forgot our anniversary…  Male Announcer:   Give yourself and your partner a great night's sleep with Dr. Lane & As -  sociates. Call 888-986-3313.  [2nd radio playback]  CPAP Alternative   [0:11:18]  Female Advertiser:   Have you been diagnosed with sleep apnea? Although CPAP is the  most commonly prescribed treatment for sleep apnea, some find it adversely affects their  lifestyle. If CPAP hasn't worked for you, an oral device might be the answer. Oral devices  are easy to use, non-surgical, and are covered by most insurance plans. Ask your doctor  about this FDA-approved CPAP alternative. Or for more information about the CPAP alter -  native oral device, contact the office of Dr. Jamison Spencer at 376-3600. That's  376-3600.  [3rd radio playback]  Valentines Day Gift   [0:11:50]  Dr. Jamison Spencer:   Men, this Valentine's Day, you may have given your wife choco -  lates or flowers. How about giving her something she can really use, a good night's sleep?  This is Dr. Jamison Spencer. A study performed at the Mayo Clinic showed that snoring  and sleep apnea not only affects the quality of your sleep, but your wife's too. If you've  been diagnosed with sleep apnea, you owe it to your wife and your family to give CPAP  another try, look into surgical options, or try an oral appliance. If you're tired of being tired,  and your wife is too, talk to your family doctor or sleep specialist about a referral for an oral  appliance, or call our office for more information at 376-3600.  [4th radio playback]  Why is Your Husband on My Couch?   [0:12:22]  Rachel’s Sister:   Hey Rachel, why did your husband sleep on my couch last night?  Rachel:   I’m sorry.  Rachel’s Sister:   No, it's okay. I'm glad to help you and David out. So, what am I helping?  09/01/25   Page   of 5   18

SSC 2.0 - 402: Marketing that Works Part 2  Rachel:   Sleep apnea. You didn't hear him snoring?  Rachel’s Sister:   Well, yeah.  Rachel:   He won't use his CPAP. He hates it. His snoring is back, and I'm up most of the  night, every night. I can't do it.  Rachel’s Sister:   You need to call Dr. Lane & Associates.  Male Advertiser:   Sadly, a lot of relationships get stretched to the limit because the partner  of a CPAP intolerant sleep apnea patient can't get the rest they need to get through each  day. More than half prescribed CPAP units are too uncomfortable to use.  Rachel:   Dr. Lane & Associates worked a miracle.  Rachel’s Sister:   I know. David's not on my couch anymore. Is he sleeping?  Rachel:   Yes, and I am too.  Male Advertiser:   Ask your doctor about Dr. Lane & Associates or call 888-986-3313.  That's 888-986-3313.  [5th radio playback]  Tired Being Tired?   [0:13:24]  Dr. Jamison Spencer:   If you've been diagnosed with sleep apnea, you owe it to your fam -  ily to give CPAP another try, look into surgical options, or try an oral appliance. This is Dr.  Jamison Spencer. In our practice, we not only help people that can't tolerate CPAP by fit -  ting them with custom-made oral appliances, but we've also helped many people effective -  ly use their CPAP by helping eliminate mouth leak or mask issues with custom solutions,  usually covered by most insurances. If you're tired of being tired, talk to your family doctor  or sleep specialist about a referral or call our office for more information at 376-3600.  That's 376-3600.  [6th radio playback]  Tired Being Tired: Part 2   [0:13:56]  Dr. Jamison Spencer:   Have you been diagnosed with sleep apnea but are unable to use  CPAP? This is Dr. Jamison Spencer. In the past eight years, my office has helped hun -  09/01/25   Page   of 6   18

SSC 2.0 - 402: Marketing that Works Part 2  dreds of people who couldn't tolerate CPAP. We provide custom-made oral appliances for  the treatment of sleep apnea. If you've given up on CPAP and you're tired of being tired,  ask your family doctor or sleep specialist if an oral appliance might be right for you, or call  our office for more information at 376-3600. It's time you had a good night's sleep again.  376-3600.  [end of radio playback]  Marketing To Physicians   [0:14:25]  Here's a funny little bit from John Oliver that's talking about marketing to doctors, and this  is more true than a joke.  [video playback]  John Oliver:   If you're thinking, why do doctors let drug reps into their offices at all? Well,  they don't come empty-handed. They'll often show up with free samples, and even better,  free chicken parm.  Announcer:   Whoever said there's no such thing as a free lunch hasn't worked in a doc -  tor's office.  Jamie Reidy:   There are some offices that advertise in the front desk job description free  lunch every day. Not because the doctors are paying for it, because the drug reps are  bringing it in every day.  John Oliver:   Free lunch every day. Now, that might not seem like a big deal, but think  about it. Lunch is awesome. If Charlie Manson brought me a free lunch every day, I'd at  least listen to his sales pitch on forehead swastikas. I don't think it's for me, Charlie, but  keep talking. That's delicious.  [end of video playback]  Problems with Marketing to Physicians   [0:15:16]  One of the problems with marketing to physicians is the fact that the drug companies have  marketed to physicians a lot over the years. Now, granted, that has been significantly re -  duced. I remember early on in my career, I had a friend who was a drug rep, and oh my  gosh, those were the glory days of being a medical doctor. This drug rep, his entire job  was wining and dining these doctors that he worked with. He was in the psychiatry field,  and the medications that they would encourage them to prescribe to the psychiatric pa -  tients, he would take these doctors to Alaska to go skiing. He would take them fly fishing.  He would rent out movie theaters every time a new cool movie came out. He'd rent out the  09/01/25   Page   of 7   18

SSC 2.0 - 402: Marketing that Works Part 2  movie theater for them to bring their families to. All sorts of stuff, all the time. Would bring  in world-class speakers and have events at really nice restaurants just for those few doc -  tors. Okay, now they don't do that anymore, but it's still common for drug companies and  whatever to bring in lunch. So be a little careful, lower your expectations when you're mar -  keting to physicians.  [0:16:35]  I find that it's just simply one-on-one. Can I bring in coffee or something like that? Let me  bring in some literature. But don't be surprised if you... As a matter of fact, we don't do  lunches and whatnot for medical doctors pretty much ever anymore, because it just was  completely ineffective. You would show up, you would see this medical doctor and when  you go to their office, there'd be like two people at the front desk and you saw a couple  people in the back, but then you'd say, hey, we're gonna bring in lunch. How many people  are there? And they'd be like, oh, there's 32. You're like, what? How's that possible? And  then, you would also typically have teed up the really nice restaurant that they wanted  lunch brought in from, and this would cost hundreds of dollars. And then if you were really  lucky, the doctor would come in and even meet with you. So we don't do that anymore.  Just be aware of that. That could happen to you too. If it does, that's normal. It's not that  they didn't like you or something. That's just normal, and it's because of this as this person  on this little story says here, the doctor says, "Hey, we give you lunch every day, and that's  because drug companies are bringing it in."  Most Effective Marketing to Physicians  Your Notes!   [0:17:49]  By far, the most effective marketing for physicians is your notes. Now that might surprise  you, but it's the letters. And remember in the document center, we have our thank you for  referring letter. We have follow-up letters, things like that. So letting the doctor know that  you saw their patient. Now this includes your patients as you are starting off in dental sleep  medicine, and you're screening your own patients, and then referring them and doing the  things you're doing, having a note to the doctor, letting them know what's going on. If  you're referring to a sleep doctor, sending a note to the primary care doctor to know what's  going on. If you are referring to their own primary care doctor, I would do the phone call, as  we talked about in the past, and follow that up with a note that they can put in the patient's  chart saying, hey, here's what I saw. Here's my objective findings. Here's what I think is the  next step.  [0:18:38]  I’ve referred them to you, for consideration of a sleep study. Then when you fit them, you  should send a note to the doctor, letting them know that they've been fit with an appliance.  And then when they are doing well, you should send a note to them saying, patient's doing  09/01/25   Page   of 8   18

SSC 2.0 - 402: Marketing that Works Part 2  well, and I'm sending them back to you for consideration of objective follow-up. When  you're treating people with TMJ problems, same thing. Let them know where you're at in  the process, when it's time to put that person on kind of long-term follow-up, let them know  again. And then the other little secret sauce there, is we will copy everyone that that pa -  tient's ever seen. Sometimes, doctors will actually be confused about this, 'cause they'll  get a note on a patient, and it's a patient of record in their office, but they almost get con -  fused. Like, now why are we getting this? And it's like, oh, well, this patient said that you're  their chiropractor. You're their cardiologist. You're their whatever, and you just CC these  people. You're communicating to the main doctor that you're communicating to. Ultimately,  when you're more referral-based, that's gonna be the doctor who referred to you.  One Page Letter   [0:19:45]  But if the doctor who referred to you, that patient's seen anyone else, so this is why on our  intake forms we have there, what doctors have you seen for your problem? Who are your  doctors? And we're gonna copy all those doctors. That was taught to me probably in the  first year or two of my career by a Dr. Charlie Holt of Texas. And he's like, "The best way to  build your practice is through your letters." That is true today, as true as it was 25 years  ago, 30 years ago, just as true today. That is how practices are built, and this is why you  will also start getting referrals from people you've never actually met, because you sent  them a letter, and now they've got your name, and they're like, oh, okay, this person treats  TMJ problems, I take it, and they will refer to you. Be quick with these letters, one page.  You can have other stuff in there if you want, but at least have a one-page summary, as  well as sending marketing letters to physicians and offering to treat them, offering them to  have an experience with an oral appliance, meaning you're gonna give them an oral appli -  ance.  [0:20:52]  Stuff like that can be very effective, too. When you do that, if you wanna do that, be strate -  gic, so kind of start off, and maybe you are going to target primary care doctors. You wan -  na work with more primary care doctors. Maybe you send to 20 or 30 within a mile or two  of your practice. Then maybe you expand that out. Maybe if you believe that in your mar -  ket, the sleep doctors, cardiologists, neurologists haven't had that relationship with some -  one like me, then you could target them and send to those people. So just be strategic  with this, and it'll be very effective for you.  Why Don’t Physicians Refer (More) To Us?   [0:21:30]  So to wrap this up on marketing, let's talk about why physicians don't refer to us more.  This can be really helpful so that you know kind of what the problem is, so that you can be  09/01/25   Page   of 9   18

SSC 2.0 - 402: Marketing that Works Part 2  strategic in your approach to getting more of these base-of-the-pyramid referrals. So why  don't physicians refer to us more? Well, here's basically a blog post, Why Didn't My Doctor  Mention Oral Appliance or Appliances for Sleep Apnea and What You Can Do About It And  this is from 2025, and here's some of the things mentioned in that article.  Number 1 and 2   [0:22:04]  Faster symptom relief with CPAP, so doctors are like, well, let's go with CPAP first, 'cause  it's probably gonna work better. Number two, provider philosophy and bias towards CPAP.  That comes from their experience, and they don't know that oral appliances tend to be bet -  ter tolerated. They don't know that custom oral appliance therapy and CPAP can have sim -  ilar results because of the greater tolerance and greater usage of oral appliances.  Number 3   [0:22:34]  Number three, lack of knowledge about oral appliances in the medical community. I come  across this all the time, that there are misconceptions out there, including, again today,  now this has been the case for decades, decades. This article, this blog post written in  2025, so this is pretty up-to-date stuff, and the misconception out there, oral appliances  aren't reimbursable by medical insurance. Oral appliances have been paid for by medical  insurance for over 25 years. Oral appliances cause TMJ problems. Well, that's a little bit  due to the FDA saying, you can't treat someone with an oral appliance if they have a TMJ  problem, which is total baloney. But people like us in the field know this, but our physicians  don't know this.  [0:23:18]  And it's shocking to me how often a physician will say something like, well, I didn't think  that I could send them for an oral appliance 'cause the patient said that they had a TMJ  problem. What does the patient know? And maybe they were referring to a TMJ problem  25 years ago. So I educate the physicians to say, hey, not only is oral appliance therapy  not contraindicated if the patient has a TMJ problem, but as a dentist who treats tons of  TMJ patients, we look for them having sleep apnea 'cause if they have sleep apnea, it's  often the sleep apnea that's driving the TMJ problem. The patient is clenching and grinding  their teeth to try to protect their airway so they don't die. When we protect their airway,  they stop that behavior and their TMJ problem gets better. So you educate the physician  on that. And then very commonly, physicians believe that oral appliances are only for mild  cases. Now, that did get helped by the pandemic a bit, because physicians couldn't get a  CPAP unit for their patient. So there was supply chain issues and things like that. So they  started referring more moderate and severe patients for oral appliance therapy. Guess  what? It worked. Patients liked it. So now there's a lot of physicians that will refer for oral  09/01/25   Page   of 10   18

SSC 2.0 - 402: Marketing that Works Part 2  appliance first, and only if the patient doesn't do well with the oral appliance will they refer  for CPAP. That's far more common nowadays. Okay, let's keep going.  Number 4   [0:24:43]  Insurance challenges for OAT reimbursements. Now, that can be true. And again, if you've  probably been through this, that you know that when you're just beginning, you make mis -  takes. You don't understand all the rules. You're working with different companies. Maybe  sometimes those companies aren't very nice. They might reach out to a physician to get  records, so that they can get the claim paid. And maybe they're demanding. And the  physician's office is like, what's going on? Why are we having to send some dentist all this  paperwork and stuff, so that they can get paid for this treatment? This is super weird. They  don't understand how all that works. It's never been explained to them. And so, that can  kind of be a turnoff.  Number 5   [0:25:25]  Number five, lack of referral sources for qualified oral appliance dentists. They don't have  a boarded dentist near them or something like that. They don't have any clue of a dentist  that can do this. So that can be a problem too. That's where you come in to let them know  that you're there.  Number 6   [0:25:41]  Number six, challenges in collaboration between dentists and physicians. Dentists and  physicians don't work together a lot other than oral surgeons work with ENTs and other  medical doctors. But your general dentist doesn't tend to have a significant collaboration.  And because of this, we don't often communicate the same way that they do. We don't  necessarily send them the notes. When we refer back, we don't send a note. This is some -  thing that I've talked to you about quite a bit. And you need to learn how to communicate in  the way the physicians are used to. And then this will be taken care of.  Number 7   [0:26:19]  Number seven, misinformation from general dentists. That's interesting. So that is dentists  themselves saying, oh, yeah, you've got to avoid those things. These are gonna cause  TMJ problems. They're gonna change your bites. They're gonna cause all manner of  09/01/25   Page   of 11   18

SSC 2.0 - 402: Marketing that Works Part 2  harm. You shouldn't be doing oral appliance therapy. Or they're telling this to physician col -  leagues. They know the medical doctor from the club. They're just talking over a sandwich  after nine holes of golf. And, hey dentist, what do you think about this? This dentist has the  slightest bit of knowledge and then says, "Yeah, I'd really avoid those oral appliance  things." There's gonna be nothing but problems. That can be a problem as well.  Number 8   [0:27:02]  Number eight, Lack of public awareness and industry representation. So I showed you  earlier ads that are multimillion-dollar ad spends on TV and whatnot and a lot of production  value there from Inspire. Well, Inspire is running those ads. In dental sleep medicine, we  make custom-fit appliances for every patient. And you may use different labs for that, but  everything you do is custom-made for only that one human. There's no mass market of  this. And as such, the companies, all of these companies, these oral appliance manufac -  turers and stuff, are relatively small. They may do millions of dollars a year, but in the big  scheme of things, that's pretty small. So they don't have budgets to be going out to any  town USA and running TV ads about oral appliance therapy, hoping then that a patient is  gonna see that and go to their dentist, and the dentist is gonna choose that appliance.  That just ain't happening. So our industry does not tend to be driving public awareness.  [0:28:07]  Some industry members do, try to do research, but even then, a lot of the research that  they put their effort into is more on like, why our appliance is better than some other appli -  ance or things like that, really more directed at the dentist than the public. There's none  that I'm aware of. Well, actually, right now, there is a documentary that was done on sleep  apnea, and oral appliances are highlighted in that documentary. That could move the nee -  dle a little bit with the public awareness. But unlike CPAP, Inspire, things like that, those  have big dollars behind them, and the public awareness is much, much, much greater.  You're not gonna see a CPAP commercial anymore though, because it's just everybody  knows about it. Inspire is out there advertising, and because of that, that's actually increas -  ing awareness of oral appliances, 'cause people are looking into it and then finding us as  part of the alternatives to CPAP market when they're looking for Inspire.  Why Don’t Physicians Refer (More) To Us?   (Old Survey)   [0:29:10]  So going back a few years, this is an article that was published in Sleep Review, and what  they did is they did a survey of people in the sleep industry, and asked them the question,  why aren't more patients being referred for oral appliance therapy? This survey, so that  you understand that this wasn't all medical doctors that were filling this out, we have 64%  was sleep center director or supervisor or manager. So that's the person over the sleep  09/01/25   Page   of 12   18

SSC 2.0 - 402: Marketing that Works Part 2  center, was more than half of the people that filled out this survey. We have 23% were  sleep doctors, sleep medicine physicians, and then within that, we had 4% pulmonologists,  4% neurologists, 2% otolaryngologists. These may have been dual-boarded people, but  that's kind of the mix of people that were answering this survey. So keep that in mind. It's  not all medical doctors. About roughly 25% was medical doctors, and others were kind of  managers. But here's what they said nevertheless. All right. So in order of priority of num -  ber one through, these aren't numbered, but this were the priority of the things that they  said that they wanted them to do. You can kind of see over here in the article, it's num -  bered here, one, two, three, four, and five, six, seven, eight.  Number 1   [0:30:31]  So number one, I want to try other strategies to get the patient CPAP adherent. That is su -  per-duper common for, and this makes sense. This is their business is sleep lab, possibly  DME provider, sleep doctor. Yeah, they want the patient to use CPAP. Makes sense.  Number 2   [0:30:47]  Number two, patient won't be able to afford the oral appliance. Now I think number two is  really the big factor there. Because CPAP, remember, is rented. Remember me talking  about that, that it's rented for 90 days. It's rented for that first three months. And if the pa -  tient isn't compliant in that first 90 days, then it's basically repossessed because insurance  is gonna pay for it. And that's it. So the sleep center, they really want number one. They  want that person to be compliant, so that they can get paid long-term. And so the patient's  better, obviously, that goes with it. But that's why they're going to lean towards that. Now,  on the other hand, if let's say they don't have anything to do with CPAP. They're not mak -  ing a dime on the CPAP, but they know, that it costs the patient almost nothing to try CPAP,  because of that rental period thing. The out-of-pocket cost for the patient trying that CPAP  for that first three months is nominal. Basically nothing.  [0:31:56]  With us in contrast, it's not nothing. It's something. And if we are, even if we're working  with medical insurance, there's gonna be a co-pay there, and that's likely to be hundreds  of dollars. Now, for you as a dentist, you may be like, yeah, so what? It's only hundreds of  dollars. They're kind of normal people. That's a really big deal. There's people that will  drive 10, 20 miles out of their way to save a $10 co-pay. So don't be terribly surprised, if  physicians are concerned about this. And put yourself in their shoes, too. If you knew that  your patient could try something that was gonna cost them basically nothing, and if they  could stand it, it would work for them, why wouldn't you try that? Why wouldn't you try  them on CPAP first? I would. I think that's the right thing to do. If I could keep from strap -  09/01/25   Page   of 13   18

SSC 2.0 - 402: Marketing that Works Part 2  ping something to someone's teeth for the rest of their life. Now, there could be some den -  tal side effects with CPAP, depending on the mass they have. But in general, that's not a  massive concern that we have. Seems like it'd be better from a dental standpoint to try  CPAP first. So I got no problem with that. Number two, though, is the cost of the oral appli -  ance therapy. I think as we can kind of drive that down, which might be due to printing ap -  pliances, things like that, working with insurance companies to get that amount that the pa -  tient has to pay down, or providing options for that patient to pay their out-of-pocket using  payment plans, things like that. The more affordable, the easier you can make it financially  for the patient, the more the physician's gonna be like, well, yeah, let me try oral appliance  therapy first.  Number 3   [0:33:44]  Number three, oral appliance therapy may not work. Well, yeah, that's true. So remember,  CPAP basically always works. Not everyone can stand it. Oral appliance therapy, almost  everyone can stand it, doesn't always work.  Number 4   [0:34:58]  Number four, oral appliance won't record the patient's adherence with therapy. True, but  there are things on the market that you can, there are trackers and whatnot, you can put  in. I've never had a physician be really serious about this. They bring that up because  CPAP, of course does, but in my experience, people don't lie about this. When they're do -  ing oral appliance therapy, they're doing it 'cause they care. That's an interesting aspect of  the people that we treat with oral appliance therapy for sleep apnea is by definition, they  care. If they didn't care, they wouldn't come. So that's pretty cool. Now, you will have some  people that are there because their wife made them, but that still means they care, or they  wouldn't even do that. But a huge percentage of our patients, when you get to the level  where your foundation is based on referrals from physicians, those are a ton of CPAP fail -  ure patients. And for them to make the effort to come to you, is because they care about  their health. Now, with that in mind, they're not trying to trick some system or something  and say, yeah, I'm wearing my oral appliance every night when they really aren't. They will  tend to be very honest with you of how frequently they're using it, when they're taking it  out, if they're having problems. With CPAP, there's enough people out there that are using  it because of their job, or they need to keep their driver's license or stuff like that, where  there's all manner of shenanigans that goes on there, to kind of trick the system to make  people think that they're using it because it is compliance monitors is based on the ma -  chine itself.  [0:35:38]  09/01/25   Page   of 14   18

SSC 2.0 - 402: Marketing that Works Part 2  Oral appliance therapy, I don't think we really need that. There are, again, some devices  out there, but all they do is make the treatment more expensive. Insurance doesn't pay for  that monitoring. So right now, not really a big deal. Now, this has been going on for  decades. So if you hear of some manufacturers, I'm like, oh, yeah, we've got this monitor  chip and it does this whiz bang thing or whatever. Frankly, in my opinion, don't care. I  would rather have a person have something like a Garmin watch, a Fitbit, an Apple watch,  a whoop band, an aura ring, and be tracking those things 24 hours a day, like my Garmin  watch does, and their sleep, and then use something like SnoreLab. I think that that's a  better tracker in my book.  Number 5   [0:36:44]  Patient may develop side effects from using the oral appliance. This is, again, due to mis -  understanding of how oral appliances work. And as I like to joke, and it's not really a joke,  oral appliance therapy for sleep apnea doesn't cause TMJ problems. Oral appliance ther -  apy for sleep apnea done by dentists who have no clue what they're doing, cause TMJ  problems.  Number 6   [0:36:44]  Next, I worry dentists are acting outside of the scope of their practice in all or in part when  treating obstructive sleep apnea. That usually is not gonna come from the physicians. As a  matter of fact, in my experience, most physicians are the opposite. They're thinking, why  do I even need to be involved? Like when you're asking for a prescription or something,  they're like, you're a doctor, what do you need me for? Just do it. Just do it yourself. They  don't understand that we need their notes in order to get paid by insurance. They don't un -  derstand any of that. Most of the time, medical doctors will treat you as a dentist as a col -  league, as a equal. They're not gonna treat you as like, whoa, dude, you're way out of your  lane. That may happen, but it's very uncommon.  Number 7   [0:37:28]  Next, patients disappear when I refer them to a dentist. I've talked about this before. This  is the critical aspect of communication. And maybe I haven't mentioned this before, so let  me do it now. If you have a patient that's referred to you, and you don't get a hold of them  to get them in for evaluation, you need to send that doctor a letter that says, thank you for  the referral. We never got a hold of your patient. Hope they're doing better. If they do de -  cide to come in at some point, we'll let you know. Thank you for the referral again. So even  09/01/25   Page   of 15   18

SSC 2.0 - 402: Marketing that Works Part 2  when you don't even see the patient, you need to communicate back to that doctor. 'Cause  otherwise, that doctor assumes that the patient did what they told them to, which is to go  see you, and then the patient doesn't. But as far as the doctor's concerned, they did, which  means that patient was lost. Sent them to the dentist, never heard from him again. I have  heard sleep doctors say that hundreds of times. No kidding. Hundreds of times. Very  common refrain of sleep doctors saying, "Oh, yep, I referred my patient to a dentist, never  heard back." Now, probably that was because at that time when I heard that over and over  again, I don't hear that as much recently, by the way. But when I would hear that back  then, almost assuredly what was happening there, is the sleep doctor assumed that all  dentists were experts in this, that we all knew what we were doing, and just told the pa -  tient, hey, see your dentist about that.  [0:38:53]  And then the patient maybe did. Probably they didn't. But let's say they did. They brought it  up to their dentist. Hey, dentist, my sleep doctor said I should talk to you about an oral ap -  pliance. The dentist, very likely, 99.99% chance that dentist knew nothing about sleep ap -  nea and snoring, but thought, well, doctor said I should try something. Why not? And that  doctor happened to have a flyer there from Glidewell and saw in there the Silent Nite Ap -  pliance. So I thought, well, what the heck? Let's go ahead and make this. That doesn't cost  very much. I'll charge the patient 800 bucks or something. Give it a whirl. And did that. Pa -  tient used it, didn't use it, whatever happened, but never in a million years would that den -  tist think to themselves, oh, I should probably send a letter to that doctor who told the pa -  tient that they should talk to me about it. There was no official referral. It was just talk to  your dentist about it. So it's no wonder that there was no communication chain that oc -  curred in that scenario. I'll bet you, that that was 99% of the time what happened. Once I  could connect these doctors, again, this happened over and over and over again, I con -  nect that doctor with someone in my study club or something, boom, everything's taken  care of. There's great communication. They know that there's kind of a chain of custody  there with that referral, and they know what's happening. That changes the world for them.  Number 8   [0:40:17]  And lastly, and I think, again, these were an order of importance, and the percent of people  who said that that was a concern, I don't know a local dentist who I trust with my patients.  This is where you come in. If this is still the case that where you practice, and oh, by the  way, for my international members, this is super common, that they're not gonna know any  dentist in the area. In the United States, almost all dentists are at least aware of sleep ap -  nea and snoring, and the vast majority don't treat it, don't touch it with a 10-foot pole, and  that goes double for TMJ problems, but at least are aware of it. When I travel around the  world and lecture, most dentists are absolutely clueless about this, but the physicians in  Brazil and in Spain and in Germany and in wherever, they deal with sleep apnea all the  09/01/25   Page   of 16   18

SSC 2.0 - 402: Marketing that Works Part 2  time. They probably actually know that oral appliance therapy is an option, but they have  no idea that there's any dentist in their area that can help. This is where you come in. This  is why you do your marketing to the physicians, make that the base of your pyramid, and  everything will be cool.  Marketing That Works   [0:41:28]  And that's it for marketing that works. Going back to kind of my splash slide here, be a  spear-fisherman, don't be the net fisherman. And the spearfishing goes for the physicians  that you're looking to market to, to the patients that you're looking to market to, for every -  thing that you're looking to do, be really specific on it, get what you're going for. Have that  base of your pyramid, be doctor referrals, and I can promise you that your practice is  gonna build and build and build and build and build over the years. Be cognizant of your  capacity, of how you're gonna do this, how you're gonna handle that growth. But as you  make that the base of your pyramid and not mass marketing, very expensive marketing,  make that base of your pyramid the doctor referrals is just gonna build those doctor refer -  rals. You're gonna have a ripple effect out there of doctors you've never even heard of re -  ferring to you. That is the marketing that works.  [0:42:24]  That's why in our practice, even those ads that I shared with you, those are from a long  time ago. We've not done a billboard, a radio ad, a TV ad, even a direct mail piece for  many, many years. That's just not something we do. Now you, on the other hand, as you're  building up, that may be something you do. Follow the pathway that we already have  done, do what we've done, and maybe you'll get those same results. Not maybe you'll get  those same results. Yes, you'll get those same results, but be really smart on how you do  that. And I can virtually promise you success because there's a science that goes along  with that success. And remember, before you even think of any marketing outside of your  own walls, you need to build that foundation of you being respected in your own communi -  ty, knowing, having connected with these doctors, having your referral sources in place, all  of that precedes any type of external marketing. You've got to have that strong foundation  before you do anything. Now, I will give you a caveat there. I don't consider your website  external marketing. So you spend some money on your website, get your SEO in there.  [0:43:35]  Remember, the doctors are gonna refer to you, and when they refer to you, if the patient  just goes to Bob's Family Dental, and there's not word one about sleep apnea or TMJ on  there, patients are gonna be like, I don't think this is the right place 'cause it doesn't say  diddly in here about TMJ, and that's why it was referred to. So make sure that you build  that foundation, get your website going, and maybe you have a separate website just for  sleep and TMD or a sleep website and a TMD website and then your restorative website.  Be smart about that, but no way do you have a billboard or a radio ad or TV ad or anything  09/01/25   Page   of 17   18

SSC 2.0 - 402: Marketing that Works Part 2  like that, until you've got that firm foundation of physician referrals. And then, you're only  gonna do ads that you think to yourself to reiterate this point one more time, 'cause it is  super-duper important. You're only gonna do it in an ad that you say to yourself, if the only  person who ever sees this ad is my number one referring doctor, I'm sure they'll be happy  with it. They'll think that's a cool ad. Take all that into account. Go out there. Spread your  influence more. That's marketing that works. Take care.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 18   18

