SSC 2.0 - 403: Working with Sleep Doctors  SSC 2.0   Level 4  403: Working with Sleep Doctors  [intro music]  Working with Sleep Doctors & DME Companies   [0:00:12]  Welcome to Working with Sleep Physicians and DME Companies. And I'm going to throw  in working with some other physicians here too. Now, as we get started, let's talk about  what do sleep doctors actually care about. They care about how much of a hassle it's go -  ing to be for them. And indirectly, the patient, but they really are concerned about them,  their team, others like that. And if there's something that's going to be a hassle for the pa -  tient, that's going to come back on them. So how much can you make it not a hassle?  Number two, how much it's going to cost the patient, see number one. Now, what I mean  by that is when it's going to cost the patient a bunch out of pocket, you know what? Some -  times patients complain. This happens not just in our field, but of course with medications  and whatnot, that patients will kind of demand that the physician give them a generic med -  ication or whatever's covered by their insurance. So this is not just unique to us. Number  three, that the patient will be referred back for follow-up. The most common complaint I've  heard over the years from sleep doctors is, "I refer my patients to dentists and I never see  them again."  [0:01:28]  I’ve heard that countless times all over the country. And that saddens me because I've  been teaching, of course, dentists for many, many years to be working closely with the  sleep doctors. And sometimes I think what's happening here is just a lack of communica -  tion. It's not that the dentists aren't sending them back. It's just that there's a lack of com -  munication about that. So we'll talk about that here too. And they also care about you be -  ing reasonably competent. And I put this actually fourth on the list here on purpose. This  really is in order of what they care about. And I was just talking to someone the other day  about getting their boards in dental sleep medicine. And I mentioned that if it was between  getting their boards and getting a network with medical insurance, what did they think that  the sleep doctor would care more about? And they correctly ascertained, well, probably  they would think it's more important to be a network with medical insurance. And that's for  sure correct. On the other hand, if somebody is in network with medical insurance but  does a bad job and does it multiple times, then they will stop referring to them and they will  send to someone who's not a network with insurance.  [0:02:55]  09/01/25   Page   of 1   10

SSC 2.0 - 403: Working with Sleep Doctors  So ideally, if you can be both, then that's great. But we're going to talk about those things  as we go through this session in some practical matters, and Level 4 here is about how  you can maximize your impact, right? How you can help more people, how you can be  profitable. And all of this goes into the equation and into the decisions that you need to  make on what is your practice going to look like. I like to say that there's not one way to do  dental sleep medicine and TMD. There's one way for you to do dental sleep medicine and  TMD. And even that will change over time. Where you are right now, there may be one  way to do it within your restorative practice, let's say. And then maybe one day down the  road, maybe you will limit yourself to only sleep and TMD. Maybe that's in the cards for  you. So those would be very different approaches. There's really not one way. And I think a  lot of times beginners in the field and even those that are more experienced in the field get  confused and frustrated because they think that they're supposed to do things a certain  way. And that's just not true.  Your Guide to Working with Physicians   [0:04:18]  Now, before we go any further, let me talk about working with different doctors and give  you kind of your guide to working with these physicians. And as we go through the rest of  this session, I will typically, and on the slides, you will typically see the word sleep physi -  cian. But I'm going to give you ways that you can work with other physicians in your com -  munity. And that might be the best choice for you. So if I will recover this multiple times as  we go through this session. But just keep in mind, if a slide says sleep physician, that that  doesn't necessarily mean for your specific case that you'll always be working with a board -  ed sleep doctor. But let's get into this. So we have our primary care doctors and primary  care doctors come in all sorts of different shapes and sizes. And I'm just kind of talking  here about a family practitioner. This could be an internist. It could be any number of pri -  mary care doctors. And the good thing about primary care doctors is you've got one near  you. You just do. I don't care how small of a town you practice in. You probably have a  doctor. Whereas as we get into our sleep doctors, you may not have a sleep doctor in your  community, but you're going to have a primary care doctor. And in a moment, I'm going to  make a case for why it might actually be better for you to work with a primary care doctor.  Okay, we'll come back to that. Now on sleep doctors, there's three main varieties of sleep  doctors.  Pulmonologist   [0:06:00]  The first and largest group of sleep doctors are pulmonologists. I'm sure you know this al -  ready, but just to make sure we're on the same page here, no one goes to medical school  and then becomes a sleep doctor. Like they don't go med school, sleep doctor school, they  09/01/25   Page   of 2   10

SSC 2.0 - 403: Working with Sleep Doctors  go med school and then they specialize into something and then they get their boards in  sleep. The vast majority of sleep physicians still to this day are pulmonologists. It's a very  common direction or common pathway for sleep doctors to take is pulmonology and often  it's pulmonology/critical care. Those things often go together. So you have your pulmo -  nologist critical care doctors that then become boarded in sleep medicine. Now what  treatment do you think pulmonologists critical care sleep doctors are going to really like?  [0:07:06]  Did you say CPAP? Yeah, you'd be right. So pulmonologists obviously are blowing air in  the lungs. They got involved in this field because of ventilators. They got involved in this  field because of their experience in the ICUs and seeing people stopping breathing and  things like that. The founders of the field were pulmonologists and the original treatment  was them thinking, well, let's blow that airway open, let's use a ventilator and a little bit  more robust and blow some air into somebody. And so they did that. This is important for  you to understand. So as you go out in your community, I think it's critical that you actually  do a little research on the physician that you're going to talk to and be like, "Oh, okay, well,  this sleep doctor is a pulmonologist. They were in pulmonary critical care." Maybe they still  are, as a matter of fact. And I would definitely talk to them about CPAP as my primary  breaking of the ice with them. I would be talking to them about how can I help more of your  patients use their CPAP.  [0:08:19]  By the way, I should make a little note there will all use the term CPAP. And again, in 2025,  as I record this, we still always say CPAP, but really it's APAP. So it's AutoPAP. It's not con -  tinuous positive airway pressure anymore because continuous positive airway pressure  was a set pressure all through the night, whether the person was on the backside, stom -  ach, REM sleep, whatever. It didn't matter. Whereas auto set CPAPs vary. Nevertheless,  you're almost always going to hear the term CPAP. You're going to use the term CPAP, but  auto set CPAP is actually what we're talking about here. So don't let that bother you that  you're like, "Well, you know, Jamison, they're not using a CPAP. They're using an auto set  CPAP." Yeah, we know, that's just kind of the term that everybody uses. That may change,  but right now everybody still uses the term CPAP. Okay, so that's our first and biggest  group of sleep doctors is pulmonary critical care doctors who become sleep doctors. What  do they care about as far as treatment goes or what treatment do they really, really tend to  lean towards? CPAP. Okay.  Neurologist   [0:09:28]  All right. The next group, far smaller than the pulmonology critical care is neurologists.  Neurologist got into the field because of the squiggly lines, I like to say. So they're the  brainwave folks, right? And they were studying the brainwaves and looking at these differ -  ent areas of sleep and that there were these stages of sleep and the brainwaves looked  09/01/25   Page   of 3   10

SSC 2.0 - 403: Working with Sleep Doctors  really different and a lot of different things happened neurochemically. And that's their jam.  And so neurologist sleep doctors, which maybe represent 15%-ish, maybe 10%. What  treatment, well, actually let me back up. What diagnostic tests do you think that they lean  towards? Full sleep study or home sleep test? Well, if you said full sleep study, you would  be correct because most home sleep tests don't provide brainwave information. And if  there was a home sleep test that provided brainwave information, they would tend to lean  towards that because they would even say, "Well, I'm not sure if this patient was even  asleep or not based on this data from this home sleep test. Pulmonologist critical care  docs, they also like full PSG because of all the data that it gives. However, the home sleep  tests measure breathing pretty well. They measure airway obstructions, although some  don't even do that because they're using peripheral arterial tone, all the PAT devices.  [0:11:03]  And recently I talked to a pulmonologist sleep doctor about that who was like, "I don't really  like that because I like having the airflow." So you're going to see this variability based on  their training and based on what they think is important. Neurologist sleep doctors, when it  comes to treatment, what treatment do you think that they would really, really like if it ex -  isted? There's a hint for you. It doesn't exist right now. What treatment would neurologists  really like if it existed? And if you think, well, what do neurologists typically do for treatment  for their patients? And I'm not talking neurosurgeons, by the way, I'm talking neurologists.  Medications. So neurologists tend to be pro-medications. If there was a medication for the  treatment of sleep apnea, they would probably be all over that. Now, there are medications  that are used to sort of treat sleep apnea tangentially. For example, currently GLP-1s,  Ozempic, and medications like that are rather popular. And I believe Ozempic was actually  FDA cleared for treatment of sleep apnea. So there is a medication that has been given  that on-label use, not off-label use, but that on-label use for obstructive sleep apnea.  [0:12:40]  But it's not treating, per se, the direct cause, if you will, of obstructive sleep apnea. It's  treating obesity. And it's helping the patient to lose weight. So there is a medication, and  it's fascinating, actually. More and more people are wanting that medication rather than  PAP therapy and other surgical type of approaches. They're saying, "Well, just give me the  drug." That's kind of human nature, right? They want kind of the easy out, the easy fix.  Even with that, most of the sleep doctors that I've spoken to at this point are not necessari -  ly thrilled about that. However, they are usually completely on board with anything that can  help somebody lose weight, knowing that that's going to have all sorts of other positive ef -  fects. So sleep doctors as a whole tend to be pro-bariatric surgery and any other thing that  the patient can do. Obviously, lifestyle changes and whatnot to help them with losing  weight. Okay, so back to neurologists, though. The treatment that's like, okay, this is going  to protect your airway, this drug is going to make it so your airway can't collapse, which, by  the way, that's coming. That doesn't exist right this second.  [0:13:54]  So as far as the typical treatments that are available of CPAP, oral appliance therapy, sur -  gical procedures, neurologists tend to be a little bit agnostic. They're kind of like, "What do  09/01/25   Page   of 4   10

SSC 2.0 - 403: Working with Sleep Doctors  you think you'd like? What would you like the best?" And they'll go with that. Or they will  decide what they like the best. And you'll meet some neurology sleep docs that are super  into CPAP. I've met others that really didn't like CPAP that much and were very pro-oral  appliance therapy. And you're just not sure. Your pulmonologist sleep doctors, they're pret -  ty much always going to like CPAP. Neurologists, you aren't positive. They may be kind of  on the fence there a little bit.  ENT Surgeons   [0:14:35]  Okay, the next group is less than the neurologists, and that is ENTs. So these are ENT  surgeons who then get boarded in sleep medicine as well. In my experience, the ENT sur -  geons that are sleep doctors typically continue doing ENT surgery. I have met a couple  that were a little older, a little later in their career that had become only or had limited their  practice only to sleep medicine at that point. But most of the ENT sleep doctors that I've  known that are younger, they're still doing surgeries and they do sleep medicine also.  [0:15:13]  Now what treatment do you think these doctors would really be all about if it worked?  Okay, and there's the curveball I just threw there at the second. You're thinking surgery,  right? But the problem is surgery for obstructive sleep apnea hasn't been shown to be that  great, except for trach. Trach works every time, and that's a joke, but it's not a joke. So tra -  ch's great, but most people don't want a trach, right? But the other surgeries, orthognathic  surgery can be quite effective. I've known some sleep ENTs that work closely with oral  maxillofacial surgeons and they will do orthognathic surgery. ENTs have cut out the palate  in every way possible. They've done everything you can think of with the airway that way,  and it's just not that effective. They've taken the tongue forward with hypoglossal where  they take a suspension where the tongue attaches, the genioglossus, and they will move  that bone forward in order to bring the tongue a little bit forward. They've cut out part of the  tongue. They've done everything you can think of, and none of it's been that successful,  and oftentimes the treatments are pretty awful for the patient.  [0:16:38]  So in my experience, I don't have a lot of ENTs that are stoked about doing surgeries for  sleep apnea. There are some ENTs that I know that are doing quite a few Inspire surg -  eries, and that is getting kind of mixed results as well. The pulmonologist sleep doctors  that I know don't seem to be that thrilled with Inspire, mostly because it's a surgery, but it  doesn't have the main benefit of surgery. The main benefit typically of a surgery is it's not  about compliance anymore. So if somebody breaks my jaws and moves them forward and  puts in all the plates and stuff, does orthognathic surgery on me, that's it. The compliance  part is out of the equation now. That's my new skeletal system, that's my new jaw. With In -  spire, in case you didn't know this, so very quickly on Inspire, that is the device that's im -  planted into the chest, under the chest muscle here. There's a lead that goes to the inter -  09/01/25   Page   of 5   10

SSC 2.0 - 403: Working with Sleep Doctors  costal muscles that is detecting when the patient inspires, breathes in, and there's another  lead to the tongue that will shock the nerve that will cause protrusion of the tongue on in -  spiration. So every breath, it's not when the person obstructs, it's on every breath that  tongue will be protruded forward out of the airway.  [0:18:07]  Well, the thing is, the person has to turn it on. They get like a little remote control and they  have to turn on their Inspire when they go to sleep at night. And we actually have an em -  ployee in our Boise office who was given Inspire. She did it and thought, "Yeah, this is go -  ing to be great. And I don't have to use the mask or an oral appliance or anything. Awe -  some." And as an aside here, guess how much Blue Cross of Idaho was billed. We don't  know how much they paid, but we saw the EOB, the explanation of benefits, and guess  how much they were billed for this surgery. And this would have been around probably  2020. Okay, whatever you guessed, you're low. So the answer is $180,000. I mean, crazy,  right? Now, we believe that they were probably paid between $30,000 and $50,000, but  nevertheless, not cheap, right? And then here's the worst part is she didn't like it. She just  didn't like how it felt. And they tried tweaking it and stuff and couldn't tolerate it. So she  wouldn't use it.  [0:19:17]  And then they decided, well, we should take it out. Shouldn't just have this thing in your  body that you never use. So when they took it out, I believe that cost another $15,000 to  $30,000 to take it out. Okay, because of that, your pulmonary sleep doctors don't tend to  be that stoked about it because also the AHI reduction, now it varies. You could have peo -  ple that are huge responders and people that aren't that good of responders. They will do  what's called a DISE, drug-induced sleep endoscopy procedure before they do Inspire and  they'll look to see where the airway collapses. And so they're good about patient selection  with Inspire and they won't take the wrong case. But even in the good cases that they  take, there doesn't tend to be a resolution of sleep apnea. There tends to be a reduction  and typically greater than 50%. And that, by the way, is what is considered a surgical suc -  cess. Okay, let me address that really quick. I'm not sure I've talked to that in other places  here. In the literature, if you read that there was a surgical success for sleep apnea, that  means it took the AHI down by 50%.  [0:20:35]  Okay, so if the patient started at 60 and went to 30, that would be a surgical success.  Whereas with oral appliance therapy, we are judged by the same criteria as CPAP, which  is AHI below 10. So keep that in mind. All right, back to the whole thing here. So ENTs, in  my experience, and we are surgeons, so we are very similar to ENTs. We're all about  anatomy. We're surgeons. Surgeons think anatomically. They think about success. They  don't tend to be drug guys necessarily in gals. So you're going to hit it off well with the ENT  sleep doctor, that's for sure. And we hate failure. So ENTs, just like you as a surgeon, if  you did a procedure and you did it two or three times and it wasn't successful, you'd stop.  Even if there was someone out there saying, "Oh yeah, I'm doing this all the time and it's  working for me," you'd be like, "Well, there's something wrong with me because I can't do  09/01/25   Page   of 6   10

SSC 2.0 - 403: Working with Sleep Doctors  that procedure because I've tried and that hasn't worked." That tends to be kind of a sur -  geon's point of view. It's not like, well, the literature says this. It's going to be like, "Okay,  that's awesome for the literature, but in my hands, in my clinic, in my patient base, this is  not effective."  [0:21:54]  ENTs tend to be very practical that way. Now speaking also of ENTs versus pulmonolo -  gists, let's kind of contrast those two. I just mentioned that the success is judged different  with surgical, whereas for CPAP, a successful CPAP case is an AHI of typically zero. Pul -  monologists, sleep doctors are used to seeing AHIs of zero or super low when patients are  on PAP therapy. Surgeons, on the other hand, are thrilled if that AHI is reduced significant -  ly. Let's say it goes from 30 to 12 or 10 or 8, that would be super. But a pulmonologist  sleep doctor would be like, "Ah, yeah, they're still having mild sleep apnea. That doesn't  seem as great." That can help you to understand why a sleep doctor might respond differ -  ent to your success. You could have a patient that has super severe sleep apnea, let's say  an AHI of 65, and with the oral appliance, it's reduced to let's say 10. And in general, these  are all generalizations I'm saying here. You could have any individual that looks at these  things differently, of course. But in general, your ENT docs would be kind of like, "Wow,  that's amazing result. Good job."  [0:23:17]  Whereas your pulmonologist sleep doc would be kind of like, "Well, they still have mild  sleep apnea. They should probably do CPAP." And you'll be like, "What are you talking  about, man?" So keep that in mind of how they are judging these things are based on what  they typically see as a treatment. Remember, CPAP usually takes the AHI to zero. So if  your treatment is anything higher than zero, then they'll be kind of like, "Meh, it's okay. It's  not as good as CPAP, right?" Okay, so that's important. All right. Now there's one more,  and I don't have it on here yet, because it's a unicorn. And that is our primary care sleep  doctors. Now, good luck ever seeing one of these, okay? Just like good luck seeing a uni -  corn. But I've had the pleasure of working with a couple primary care doctor sleep doctors,  and they are flat out wonderful. And again, very rare, but they are wonderful. And let me  address the why I say that. And I'm not saying that my pulmonologist sleep doctor friends  and ENT sleep doctor friends and neurologist sleep doctor friends aren't wonderful. It's just  a different approach. And let me make something very clear here that may not have been  clear to you in the past.  [0:24:34]  Typically, specialists in medicine don't do basic labs. So the typical flow for a sleep medi -  cine lab would be a primary care doctor would refer to the sleep lab for a sleep study. The  sleep study would be read, interpreted by the sleep doctor, and recommendations would  be made back to the primary care doctor. In most cases, the sleep doctor wouldn't even  see the patient. Some cases they would, but in most cases they wouldn't. It's the primary  care doctor is running the show. And it'd be similar to a primary care doctor or you referring  a patient. Let's say you want to refer a patient for an MRI for their TMJ. When we do that,  we don't expect the patient to see the radiologist. And of course, they never do. They just  09/01/25   Page   of 7   10

SSC 2.0 - 403: Working with Sleep Doctors  go to the center. They get the test, in this case, an MRI. It's read, interpreted by a radiolo -  gist. A report is sent back to us, and then we take it from there. That's how normal sleep  medicine works in the medical community. But when we refer directly to sleep doctors,  what is the patient probably not getting? Well, probably they aren't getting labs. Now, they  may have had labs for some other reason.  [0:26:04]  They may have had to get a life insurance policy renewed or had to do something for work  or some other reason. Or maybe they went in to their doctor and they had a health issue  and their primary care doctor ordered some tests. But one of the things that I really, really,  really love about working with primary care sleep doctors, and we'll talk in a moment about  just primary care doctors in general, is that they're typically going to do labs. So if you  have a patient that is tired, how many things could make a patient tired? A whole bunch.  Sleep apnea is one of them. So when you work with that primary care doctor, they're prob -  ably going to do labs. And that was my experience with my primary care doctor sleep doc -  tors, is they would do a thorough history with the patient. And if the patient had not had  labs that that doctor wanted to see, looking at iron levels and thyroid levels and maybe  even vitamin D and things like that, the primary care sleep doctor would get those labs.  That is uncommon for other sleep doctors. It's not to say that they can't. They certainly  can.  [0:27:18]  It's just more common for the primary care doctors to do those labs, do that testing before  they send to the specialist. And then the specialist is doing whatever their specialty is,  sending back to the primary care doctor with that information so that the primary care doc -  tor can make decisions moving forward. Okay, so I hope that makes sense. This is really  important that you understand this and that as you introduce yourself to doctors in your  community, that you understand their background. You understand where they're coming  from. You understand their heritage, their educational background, what they're going to  tend to care about because of that educational background. And you may not have any of  these sleep doctors in your community and you may only have the primary care doctor to  work with and that's fine. Or you may have a specific sleep doctor and you may find that  they're not really pro-oral appliance therapy and we'll talk about that too and how you can  still work in that community, how you can still get your patients excellent care even if you  have a sleep doctor that doesn't really want to work with you. Okay, so this is I hope help -  ful for you to know this.  [0:28:28]  There are also some even more minor cases out there. There's a couple sleep doctors still  running around that are PhDs. That's very rare, very rare. At the beginning, that was more  common, but now most of those docs have retired. And then you might find some from  other specialties that have become sleep doctors. But this is the main, this is 99% of sleep  doctors you're going to meet nowadays, are going to be from one of these fields.  09/01/25   Page   of 8   10

SSC 2.0 - 403: Working with Sleep Doctors  Pediatric Sleep Doctor   [0:29:01]  Now let's quickly, with that in mind, talk about if you want to get a kid to have their tonsils  out. Who would you refer to? Well, in this case, you wouldn't refer to primary care and you  wouldn't refer to ENT. And in primary care in this situation, I'm talking about pediatric or a  pediatrician rather. Why that is, is because you got to put into perspective here that pedia -  tricians tend to see sick kids. It's kind of their job, right? Now, yeah, they'll see kids for  wellness checks and to get their 400 vaccinations that they have to have nowadays. Just a  little kidding there, but kids got to go into the doctor a lot more so than when I was a kid.  [0:29:48]  But a lot of those kids are gonna be sick and they have allergies and they have various  problems. So it's pretty common for that pediatrician to look in the throat of a kid and see  pretty big tonsils. So if you're thinking, "Well, these are big, I need to send to the pediatri -  cian," the pediatrician is probably gonna be like, "Give me a break. Those tonsils aren't so  big." ENTs, on the other hand, don't really like taking tonsils out. And maybe you don't  know this, but an ENT only gets paid about $350 to do a tonsilloadenoidectomy. Yikes.  Okay, that's kind of a scary procedure to do for that little money. So if I was in their shoes, I  wouldn't want to do it either. So the tactic that I use is I refer to a pediatric sleep doctor.  Why? Because a pediatric sleep doctor, guess what they're gonna do? So they're not  gonna look at the tonsils and be like, "Well, those tonsils aren't so big. I'm sure they're  fine." What are they gonna do? They're gonna do a sleep study. And typically in pediatrics,  that sleep study is going to be a full PSG. My youngest son just very recently had a full  PSG.  [0:31:00]  I kind of got him in under the pediatric window because he's 17. He'll be 18 in October of  2025. And I was like, "You know what? If we're gonna do this, we should probably do it be -  fore he turns 18 so that we can, if his AHI is below five, then he'll still be able to get treated  with insurance and whatever. Whereas if I wait until November and he's 18, then it's gonna  be adult criteria." That's completely stupid, by the way, that that's the way it works, but  that's nevertheless the way it works. So he gets a sleep study and indeed he did have an  AHI actually over five. So he kind of qualified even as an adult and we're getting him treat -  ed, but that was a full PSG. I sent him to a friend of mine, of course. I didn't go through, I  didn't jump through any hoops to get him in, but if you had a kid, your own kid or anyone in  your practice and you're pretty confident that you want them to have a sleep study, not just  to be told, "Yeah, don't worry about it," pediatric sleep doctor is the way to go because a  pediatric sleep doctor will always get a sleep study, dang near always.  [0:32:14]  If there's a reason to refer the kid, if it's just like, "Oh, I want a sleep study just for fun, just  because I wanna know what's going on," and they have no snoring, no evidence of brux -  ism, they've got the wide open airway, not wetting the bed, they're doing fantastic in  school, they're growing appropriately. I mean, everything's just perfect for this kid. Well  09/01/25   Page   of 9   10

SSC 2.0 - 403: Working with Sleep Doctors  then yeah, a pediatric sleep doctor is gonna be like, "What are you doing in here? What  are you wasting my time for?" On the other hand, if any of those things are going on, wet -  ting the bed, poor school performance, failure to thrive, any of those things going on, re -  gardless of the size of the tonsils, the pediatric sleep doctor is gonna be like, "You know  what, yeah, let's get a study. Let's get a study, let's get the test and then we'll see." And if  that kid has an AHI greater than one, then the pediatric sleep doctor is going to recom -  mend treatment. This was kind of interesting actually because I was talking to the sleep  doctor that I sent my son to just yesterday, as a matter of fact.  [0:33:11]  And I was a little surprised that he didn't recommend tonsilloadenoidectomy. Now, granted,  my son is 17 and he did say, he's like, "You know, for kiddos, definitely the way to go, for  little kids, for basically adults, kind of sucks, hurts pretty bad. And we don't see the same  success rate with adults." So, we'll talk to my son and see if he would still like to try that  because the sleep doctor's recommendation was, guess what? So this sleep doctor's a  pulmonologist, critical care trained first before sleep talk. So what did he say? CPAP, ex -  actly. And then also said, "Well, maybe oral appliance." That was kind of funny as a matter  of fact, as he said, he goes, "Well, I don't feel strongly on one way or another here." And  then he said, "Your dad might." So in other words, that I might think that oral appliance is  more appropriate. So that was kind of funny. And I've already got my son an oral appli -  ance, of course, and he does seem to be doing better. I'm still leaning a little bit towards  tonsilloadenoidectomy to see if that doesn't have a positive effect because he's only 17.  [0:34:19]  That's pretty dang young. I don't love the idea of managing that kid with an oral appliance  or something for the next 60 years. Yeah, that doesn't seem to make a lot of sense to me.  So we might move him towards that surgical approach and hope like crazy that that seems  to help. Okay, but that's the point on the pediatric sleep doctor. Now you may be thinking  to yourself, "Well, Jamison, we don't have a pediatric sleep doctor in our town." Yeah, you  probably don't. Unless you're in a bigger metropolitan area, you probably don't have that.  But that may mean that the parents got to put the kiddo in a car and drive somewhere. It's  usually not going to involve getting on a plane to go do this, but it may involve driving to a  university center that has a sleep lab and has a pediatric sleep doctor, something like that.  And I would for sure do that because again, if you go the pediatrician road or the ENT  road, probably just going to be shut down and like, "Yeah, your kid doesn't really have that  big of a problem for us to do something.”  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 10   10

