SSC 2.0 - 404: Earning Their Trust  SSC 2.0   Level 4  404: Earning Their Trust  [intro music]  What You Hope For   [0:00:12]  Now speaking of referring your patients, here's what you hope for. You hope that you have  your patients here and you're going to refer them to the sleep doctor and the sleep doctor  is going to do a sleep study and stuff and the sleep doctor is going to be like, "Yeah, right  on, oral appliance, first line therapy, it's the best, it's awesome." And every once in a while  there will be somebody that the sleep doctor thinks needs CPAP. That's what you're hoping  for. Now, more likely the case is going to be that you refer your patients to the sleep doctor  and they think CPAP is the logical choice. Again, just yesterday working with my friend's  sleep doctor, he knows it's my kid, he knows I'm an oral appliance guy, and he still alluded  to maybe CPAP. I'm pretty sure if my kid was his kid, he would be putting him on CPAP  first. Now, should we get upset about that? Should we not work with that sleep doctor  anymore?  You Just Saved a Life!   [0:01:17]  No, because really, you probably saved a life right there. Don't ever get upset or con -  cerned that you refer your patient, they get diagnosed, and the doctor says, "Why don't  you try CPAP? Why don't you try PAPT therapy first?" Never let that bother you, because  you're going to have some patients and they're going to take to that therapy like crazy and  they are going to sing your praises forever in helping them so much. There's going to be  other patients that try it and hate it, and they'll come back to you and they'll get an oral ap -  pliance. And those people are a million times easier to treat because they realize that the  alternative is CPAP, and CPAP is hard to use. An oral appliance compared to CPAP is a  walk in the park. It just is. So I like people trying CPAP first because then it makes it so  much better for them. Like oral appliance, wow, this is so much easier, so much more com -  fortable than that CPAP. But I don't ever get concerned about that. I want my patient to  have the best treatment that they can have. I'm sure you do too. So just consider you  saved a life there, not that like, "Oh, shoot, I missed out on doing an oral appliance." That  should never be our thought.  09/01/25   Page   of 1   12

SSC 2.0 - 404: Earning Their Trust  A Different Path?   [0:02:39]  Now, let me give you, though, a different pathway possibly. And let me preface this by ask -  ing you this question. Do you have someone like me in your community? And what I mean  by that is, do you have someone that has a limited practice to only sleep or sleep in TMD  and they do a lot of this in your community? Now, you might be that person. If you're a  member of Spencer Study Club, frankly, the people like me are almost always members of  Spencer Study Club all around the country. And if you have someone like me in your  community, then you might do this a little bit different. And here's why. If you refer to the  sleep doctors that our practices work with and that patient gets diagnosed and the sleep  doctor thinks an oral appliance is a good therapy for that patient, guess where they're go -  ing to refer the patient? It's not to you. They're going to refer them to us. Why is that? Well,  it's just because that's what they know. And that's what their team know. So when a sleep  doctor says, "Hey, team member. Yeah, let's get a Jamison and oral appliance." That  means let's send them to Dr. Kuehne's office. Let's send them to the Center for Sleep Ap -  nea and TMJ. Let's send them to Kevin Mangelson. That's what that means.  [0:04:16]  And they don't do that to try to be offensive to the dentist who referred that patient. They  don't even know who referred that patient. So here's a way to get around that. And I don't  mean to say it that way that you you're trying to do something untoward or fishy at all here.  I'm just saying if you want to work with... You want your patients to get diagnosed, but  you'd also like the opportunity at least to treat them with an oral appliance. And you have  someone like me in your town, this might be the way to go. And I teach this everywhere, by  the way, including in the Boise area and in the Salt Lake area, because this just is logical  and makes sense. So here's what you would do is you would have your patients and you  would refer them to a primary care or multiple primary care doctors that you work with in  your community. You would then discuss with that primary care doctor the possible need  for a sleep study.  [0:05:20]  Then here's where it changes. The primary care doctor would refer to the sleep doctor. So  this arrow down here is primary care doctor sending to the sleep doctor. As I mentioned  earlier, when this happens, it's more like us sending for an MRI. So the primary care doctor  sends to the sleep doctor. Oh, and by the way, what's the primary care doctor also possi -  bly going to do before sending for the sleep doctor? Labs? Right. So if that patient's like,  "Yeah, I'm tired all the time. I'm so fatigued, blah, blah, blah." Primary care doctors would  be like, "Hey, pee in a cup. Let's draw some blood. Let's get that checked out before we  send you to the sleep lab." That'd be very, very common. So let's say labs are all good, or  maybe they're addressing some of those things too. Primary care doctor sends to the  sleep doctor for a sleep test. Sleep test is done. Sleep doctor interprets the sleep test,  sends recommendations back to primary care doctor. Primary care doctor is calling the  09/01/25   Page   of 2   12

SSC 2.0 - 404: Earning Their Trust  shots on what the recommendation is. The recommendation from the sleep doctor could  be, and probably will be, CPAP. Number one will be CPAP.  [0:06:24]  And then number two might be oral appliance therapy. It might not. Number two might be  surgery. Number three might be oral appliance. It might not. Number three might be literal -  ly playing the didgeridoo. And number four might be oral appliance therapy. I had a sleep  doctor in the Sun Valley area that would always have that. Should always have playing a  woodwind instrument or the didgeridoo. And usually that was before oral appliance thera -  py. The lady was a character. So the sleep doctor is going to put down their recommenda -  tions, but who's calling the shots? Primary care. That's who. So primary care then is like,  "None of my patients use their CPAP. I'm going to refer for an oral appliance." Well, who's  the primary care doctor going to refer to for the oral appliance? You. Because you're the  one that put this patient into the system in the first place. That is a way for you to work with  your local medical sleep community and medical community without having a problem of  you've got someone like me in town that already has all those relationships. And by the  way, this is my preferred method of doing this by far for you.  [0:07:28]  Again, if you've already got the practice like I do, your members Spencer Study Club and  stuff, then this is irrelevant. But even for you, let's make that not irrelevant for a second. So  if you're one of my main players here in Spencer Study Club, and I've talked to my busi -  ness lead members where we talk about things like this, this is the same model that I  would teach in my own community. And I would find primary care doctors for them to work  with and things like that because I want these dentists to do some oral appliance therapy  and I want to help them. This is the way we expand beyond just our capacity. But the cool  thing about this model is you're doing it locally. And I know you're going to have companies  come to you and be like, "Hey, you got to do this home sleep testing model and yeah,  you're in Iowa and our doctor, they're going to be in Minnesota and yeah, you'll meet them  via telemedicine once or something and they'll do telemedicine stuff with your patients, but  they're never going to be with your patient. They're never going to touch your patient.  [0:08:29]  They're never going to be able to do an actual physical examination, but they're going to  run the show and we'll mail them a home sleep testing device and they'll do the home  sleep test. Then we'll interpret it and then we will order an oral appliance for you to fit doc -  tor." That's great. I don't love that model. I like you to be local. I want you to be protected. I  like your local doctors calling the shots. And if you want to help this primary care doctor  here in the the center, if you want to help that primary care to... The primary care doctor is  like, "Well, we can't get anyone into the sleep lab for like six months to get a test. How's  this going to work?" Well, hey, primary care doctor, I've got this company that I'm aware of  and they do all the home sleep testing stuff. They'll like mail the patient a home sleep test.  Sleep doc will interpret it, send you a report. And the primary care doctor is like, "Oh, that  sounds great. Yeah, I got no problem with that at all." Because who's calling the shots?  Primary care doctor.  09/01/25   Page   of 3   12

SSC 2.0 - 404: Earning Their Trust  [0:09:27]  I couldn't care less at that point if the sleep doctor is eight states away and the home sleep  test is sent by mail. I don't care. Now, I'd prefer if your community had the ability for the  primary care doctor to work with your local sleep medicine, but maybe they don't. Again,  maybe local sleep medicine is booked out six months, eight months, nine months. That  happens. But I would rather have the primary care doctor running that HST program than  you. And what's cool about that too, you could have multiple primary care doctors doing  that. If you live at this part of town, you could have a primary care doctor up here, down  here, over here and over here, all doing the same model so that you've got places to send  people so your patients can get in quickly for evaluation. They can get the sleep test quick -  ly. They can get referred back quickly. That is the way to do it. If you don't already have  this four lane freeway like I do with the local sleep doctors, this is one of the more frustrat -  ing areas if you're getting involved in dental sleep medicine and all of these things are al -  ready taken. It seems like every relationship has already been taken and you're like, well, I  don't know how to work with these people. They're all working with Jamison already. This  is how.  [0:10:43]  And if you are literally in my neighborhood, if you're a member of Spencer Study Club in  Utah or Idaho where I have practices, this is what I'm going to encourage you to do. And I  want you working still with local medical doctors. That's going to protect you. I don't want  you just doing this on your own rogue. I would rather have you working with primary care  doctors and you can then help them do the HST thing through some of these nationwide  companies. That's fine, but you're going to work with local primary care so that your patient  gets the best care available.  What Problems Can you Help Solve?   [0:11:16]  So what problems can you help your sleep colleagues solve? Well, number one is patients  not able to use their CPAP. Remember, the vast majority of sleep doctors are pulmonolo -  gists. The vast majority of sleep doctors who are pulmonologists really like CPAP. So the  first thing that I will do when I meet a new sleep doctor is I will talk to them about patients  who can't tolerate CPAP and see if there's anything I can do to help more of their patients  use their CPAP. That's exactly what I will say. And that can be combination therapy and  oral appliance therapy. And using combination therapy being an oral appliance in conjunc -  tion with the CPAP. That will be the first thing that I talk about. I'll say, "Hey, do you ever  have patients that can't tolerate their CPAP for some reason?" They'll say, "Yes, we do."  And then you say, "Well, did you know that if we did an oral appliance in conjunction with  their CPAP." Making sure that you emphasize that, "That that can often result in the nec -  essary pressure being cut in half. And I believe that that could help more of your patients  tolerate the CPAP pressure that they need." And this has been known for decades that this  09/01/25   Page   of 4   12

SSC 2.0 - 404: Earning Their Trust  is the case. But I still find that a lot of physicians are not really aware of this or they just  don't have anyone they can work with. They also will likely not be aware that medical in -  surance covers oral appliance therapy. This is another thing that I find fascinating and  ridiculous at the same time is oral appliance therapy has been covered my entire career.  Maybe not at the very beginning, but for 20 years or more, this has been covered by med -  ical insurance. And still I will find sleep doctors are like, "Oh, yeah, those things aren't cov -  ered by medical insurance, are they?" And like, "Well, yeah for 20 plus years they have  been." So make sure that they know that they can use an oral appliance in conjunction  with CPAP, make them more likely to use their CPAP to these things are covered by insur -  ance.  [0:13:18]  Now, other problems you can help solve is patients who've had a bad experience with oral  appliance therapy with some other dentists, dentists who charge excessive fees, dentists  who never follow up, never refer the patient back to the doctor. These things are very  common and not always with malice or with malevolent intent from the dentist. Often,  frankly, it's just the dentist doesn't know any better. And so they will fit a snore guard. They  will fit a silent night from Glidewell. There's nothing wrong with that appliance, but that's  one that they are aware of. And so they do that and they literally will give the patient all of  the adjustment bands and say, "Here you go. Good luck." And they really don't know how  to communicate with the doctors. That's not something you normally do.  [0:14:12]  If you are coming into this, this is a video that you've watched and you're just barely getting  into this field. What do you know about working with medical doctors and things like that?  That's not something you do on a daily basis in your practice. So some of this negative  experience that some doctors have with working with dentists is more that they... Should  be on them. They didn't reach out. They didn't mentor. They didn't help out that dentist. But  you can reverse that. And by the way, the reason I put this on the slide is to help you un -  derstand these things. If you are coming into this field right now, others of us have been  pioneering this for a long time. And it's relatively rare that you meet physicians that are  completely ignorant to oral appliance therapy. They've never heard of it before. That's pret -  ty rare. So at this point, probably if you're talking to a sleep doctor, they've got an opinion  already. And if they have a good opinion, then that's great. So if you worked in one of the  areas that we have offices, there's so many Spencer Study Club members that they are  the leaders in the field in that area.  [0:15:38]  And I can tell you're like, oh yeah, I'm in the St. Louis area. Well, St. Louis area has a  great reputation with oral appliance therapy and dentists do a great job there. Seattle has  a great reputation for oral appliance therapy and the dentists that do a good job there.  Pittsburgh has a great, and I can go on and on and on and on. On the other hand, it's pos -  sible that whatever dentists were doing it in your area maybe didn't do things exactly how  the local community feels is appropriate. And that would give it a bit of a negative reputa -  tion. And then you're going to deal with that. Frankly, the easiest way to handle that is what  09/01/25   Page   of 5   12

SSC 2.0 - 404: Earning Their Trust  I call the I'm not them model, which is you would say, "Hey, I know in the past that this has  been done and this has been done and this has been done. That's not how I do things."  You're not saying specifically, "Hey, I know Dr. Smith did all this shady stuff. I don't do that.  I'm not Dr. Smith." You don't need to do that. All you need to do is just bring up these  things.  [0:16:42]  "Yeah, I know there's a dentist here locally that was charging $10,000 a case and most of  the patients needed orthodontics after they would have that initial $10,000 case. And then  they were told it was going to cure their sleep apnea. And unfortunately, it actually doesn't  cure their sleep apnea. I know all of that's happened. We have a different approach. We  do it this way."  Gain the Trust of your Sleep Community!   [0:17:04]  So let me go through a couple ideas of how you might gain the trust of your sleep commu -  nity and your medical community. And I'm a big advocate for you being respected in your  own town. I hope that you have a goal of that. And you may think about that and you're  like, "Yeah who cares about that?" And frankly, the people who say who cares about that  are people that don't have a good reputation in their own town. And they're like, "Well,  whatever, what do I need that for? I'm in competition with all my local dentists and stuff like  that. I don't need anybody." Okay. I don't attract a lot of those people in the Spencer Study  Club. You might have snuck in, but probably not.  [0:17:51]  So probably you do have a desire to be respected in your own community. You feel that  you're part of your own community. Maybe you participate in your local dental society.  Maybe you're in the leadership of your local dental society. Maybe you're in the state den -  tal association. That means you value this working with local colleagues and dentists and  medical colleagues. I think that's important and it's going to give you much more confi -  dence in treating people if you know you've got a community around you. You may re -  member in level two, as I talked about the examination that we do prior to doing oral appli -  ance therapy, and you may remember me saying that my dental exam or the dental exam  that Kevin will do in our Salt Lake office or Cameron will do in our Boise office, our dental  exam consists of asking the patient, "Who's your dentist? Is there any dental work pending  or any dental issues that you're aware of?" That's pretty much it. "When did you see your  dentist last?" That's our dental exam. And if they say, "I don't have a dentist." Then we find  out where they live and we refer them to a dentist.  [0:19:11]  So our model is our patients have a dentist and we work with their dentist and we copy  their dentist on our notes. Now, possibly because of that, we've never had a patient sue  us. We've never had any real negative thing like that happen because, I believe anyway,  09/01/25   Page   of 6   12

SSC 2.0 - 404: Earning Their Trust  because our local dental community, we're respected by them. And when a patient has a  posterior open bite or a side effect or jaw pain or the oral appliance isn't working very well  or whatever, their dentist is more likely to say, "Well get back to Dr. Kuehne and tell him  what's going on. I'm sure he wants to help you with that." Versus, "Hey, you should sue  them." So I want you to have the same thing. And I think that this is possible. I think there  are so many people for us to help that we don't have to be competitive in nature. We can  work with our local medical and dental communities and provide better care through that  model. And I already talked about if you can't get people into the local sleep lab, then you  might work with a local primary care doctor and have them run that testing part.  [0:20:33]  And they could then use a company from out of state and stuff. That's all right. You would  still be working with local medical doctor running the show. So as I say, gain the trust of  your sleep community on these following slides. That could be your sleep community. That  is important. But it could also be, or actually broadening that scope to also your local med -  ical and dental communities.  Gain Expertise   [0:20:58]  So number one, gain expertise. You're already doing that. You're a member of Spencer  Study Club. You're probably looking towards getting your boards in dental sleep medicine  if you haven't already. We get a ton of members. Spencer Study Club are people who are  already boarded. They've gone through all that stuff. And then they're like, "Hey, how do I  do this in the real world? I've got my boards. I've got my credentials. But man, I really don't  know how to treat people that much. "That's where I come in and make it practical. But get  your expertise and understanding the right way to do things and to have a mentoring  group, to have colleagues around you that can help you with clinical cases is going to be  priceless to you. And you can expand this as well. I'll talk about this a little later. But your  experience level is not just yours, but it's actually from the entire group. You can extrapo -  late your experience level because you have access to that experience. So number one,  gain expertise.  Demonstrate Collaboration   [0:22:09]  Number two, demonstrate collaboration. Show them that you are working with them, not  against them. And this comes from you referring people, of course, and communicating  appropriately and not over communicating. You don't want to send a bunch of material to  the doctors and whatnot, but letting them know what's going on and keeping them in -  formed. Show this collaboration. As I mentioned in our practice, we're also collaborating  09/01/25   Page   of 7   12

SSC 2.0 - 404: Earning Their Trust  with the dentist or with an orthodontist, if it's a young person or whatever. So we're doing  this collaborative model. I think that that makes a lot of sense.  Build Relationships   [0:22:50]  Build relationships. This is really all about your relationships. When I was early on in this, I  would routinely go out and meet the local sleep doctors one-on-one. And in the Boise  area, it's not so much of a let's have lunch place. We did that a little. I would sometimes  bring in lunches or something like that. But oftentimes it was just come by the office, go  through a case, talk about something that's going on. They might invite me to their grand  rounds or to their in-service meetings, things like that. That's what it was more about. Now,  I spent four years in North Carolina helping a large dental group there get involved in sleep  and TMD. And there, it was a lot more about lunches and dinners. The doctors there were  just, that was just their style, their tradition was to go out and have a meal with each other.  And so I did that all the time. And I built relationships. I'm very, very proud to say that the  relationships that I've built with my sleep medical colleagues, I maintain to this day. I don't  have a practice anymore in North Carolina, or at least not at this moment. But I have mul -  tiple sleep doctors there that I communicate with on a daily basis, or not a daily basis, but  on a regular basis. Why I said daily is because literally yesterday I was communicating  with one of these sleep doctors. And I think that's, I'm very happy with that. I have a rela -  tionship with doctors that I have actually never worked with personally, but they've worked  with colleagues of mine.   Building relationships, this will be one of your greatest assets if  you can build that relationship, particularly in your local community. Having relationships  around the country, that's okay, but having it with your local community is going to be  priceless.  Focus on Evidence-Based Practice   [0:24:51]  Focused on evidence-based practice. And remember, I know I harp on this, but evidence-  based does not mean research-based. Yes, I would like you to be in the know of the re -  search. However, in our surgical style field here, we're not doing surgery, but in our  anatomy-based oral appliance therapy field, the evidence typically lags behind what we're  doing. And as we've discussed before, the most important thing for the oral appliance  therapy is that the patient will actually use the appliance. So there's a little bit more art  here than science. However, for you to be up-to-date on what are the current guidelines  and what is out there in the literature is important. Just the other day, speaking of relation -  ships, I was talking to another sleep doctor friend of mine who was the director of the Uni -  versity of Utah, now has gone to UC Davis. And we had this discussion over, because he's  09/01/25   Page   of 8   12

SSC 2.0 - 404: Earning Their Trust  helping out with our University of Utah Mastery program. And at the end of it, he's like,  "Hey, what do you think of this article?"  [0:26:06]  And it's from 2022 and had some very big deal names on it. And it was on an appliance  idea that I disagree with. And this is the appliance that makes the claims that it's changing  the airway and curing sleep apnea just by this palatal expansion, basically. And went  through the article. And it's a little impressive, but really not that impressive. Like a lot of  the patients, it did reduce their AHI by as much as about 50%. Some of them, it did a really  good job. And this is without wearing their appliance after a certain amount of time. How -  ever, not being able to look at the details of that study of like, well, how much time did they  spend supine sleep in both of these studies and look at all of the other things that we know  can have a dramatic difference on an AHI. And that data wasn't there. And at the very end  of the study, it said that all of these researchers were on the board of directors or on the  advisory board of this company that has the appliance.  [0:27:12]  And I just cut and pasted that back to that sleep doctor and said, "Well, I'm sure these are  good people, but this is, of course, of concern." And he's like, "Yeah, that's for sure." So  that was important that I was able to go through that literature, that I was able to discuss  that with him. When things come up in the sleep medicine field, something that me and my  colleagues will do fairly commonly two, three, four times a year is if there's a paper that  comes out and it looks like maybe it's a little controversial or like, for example, there was a  paper that came out a few years ago, a huge study, and it basically said that CPAP didn't  work. And that was really the bottom line is CPAP doesn't seem to be working that well.  And we looked at it and discussed it. And we found that in this study of tens of thousands  of people, the average person was only using their CPAP about three to four hours a night.  And there were sleep doctors that came out and said, "Well, really the title of this study  should be, people who don't use their CPAP don't get as much of a benefit of CPAP." And  that seems really logical too.  [0:28:29]  So we took that opportunity to reach out to our medical colleagues and we didn't give them  an opinion. We didn't say, "Hey, we saw this paper. Here's what we think." We just said,  "Hey, we saw this paper. What do you think?" And then that opened up a cool dialogue  and they were able to say what they thought. This happened a few years before that when  there was a little bit of controversy over whether dentists should be using home sleep test -  ing ever, like ever, ever, ever. So not to diagnose people with sleep apnea, but just the  idea of I'm going to give you a home sleep testing device to see how you're doing. And  there were... The Academy of Sleep Medicine actually came out and said, "Yeah, this is  inappropriate. Dentists should never be using home sleep testing equipment." And we saw  that. We sent it out to our sleep colleagues and said, "Hey, just saw this. What do you think  we should do here in Boise? What do you think we should do here in Salt Lake?" And then  they told us exactly what they thought that we should do. And that is what we do.  [0:29:31]  09/01/25   Page   of 9   12

SSC 2.0 - 404: Earning Their Trust  They weren't opposed to us using home sleep testing for titration of appliances. Actually,  one group in Utah wanted us doing the home sleep testing to make sure the patient was  doing okay. So the evidence-based practice is, in my mind, just keeping in touch with your  colleagues on the research, on the guidelines that are being put out there, and then letting  them know your experience, your clinical experience, and how that's directing the care that  you provide for your patients that have seen them and come back to you, or their patients,  once they are referring you patients that didn't initiate with you.  Communicate Effectively   [0:30:18]  Communicate effectively. I cannot more strongly emphasize how important this is, but  maybe not how you think. So physicians, in general, don't want a ton of data. There are  some programs out there that will spit out a 14-page report, and no physician's ever going  to use that. So just giving the physician a one-pager that's like, saw the patient, here's the  next step, I'll let you know when we do whatever. For example, we have in your document  center is a document that we call the thank you for referring letter.  [0:30:55]  So if a physician referred you a patient, you would just say, "Hey, thanks for the referral,  saw your patient, here's a couple objective measurements, patient's a good candidate for  oral appliance therapy, they've decided to move forward, we're getting them back on what -  ever date for the oral appliance fitting, we will follow up with them and then send them  back to you for consideration of objective follow-up." And that'd be it. So that'd be that let -  ter. And then when they're ready to go back for objective follow-up, you would send an ad -  ditional letter that says, "Hey, patient's been doing great, they're not snoring anymore,  they're feeling better." If you did some sort of objective measurement, you could put that in,  "Hey, we did a pulse oximetry, their pulse oximetry's looking a lot better than was baseline,  or we did a home sleep test just to see if they're doing better or not, it appears that they're  doing a little bit better, but sending them back to you now for an official follow-up with  whatever you feel is appropriate." That communication would be critical. Don't just send  the patient and say, "Hey, go talk to your sleep doctor about this." Without sending that  communication. Good communication is important, and whenever there's a question that  could be an issue, then I would pick up the phone and leave a message and have the doc -  tor call me back at his or her convenience. That's how I would handle anything, that there's  any possibility of any upset or something like that. That has to do with insurance billing or  whatnot. We'll talk a little bit more about here.  Emphasize Patient Care   [0:32:24]  09/01/25   Page   of 10   12

SSC 2.0 - 404: Earning Their Trust  As I mentioned in the beginning, one of the things that physicians really care about is no  hassles for them, and you putting a great emphasis on patient care will really help them  out. They want, just like you would, they want the patient to come in and say, "Hey, I went  to the person you referred me to, and I just want to tell you I had a great experience. From  the initial phone call to the person that I met when I came into their office to the doctor to  the people that are helping me out, the doctor's assistants, it's just a class act. That's  great." That's really what you're going for. Of course, your focus is on patient care, but the  better experience that patient can have, the better this is going to be for you long term be -  cause they're going to tell the referring doctor. Little things can make a big difference, like  if they can't ever get a hold of your team on the phone, if your team doesn't return their  voicemails or text messages or whatever, if there's any insurance weirdness, all of those  things will end up being reported back to the physician inevitably.  Consider Utilizing Technology   [0:33:38]  Talked a little bit already about this topic, but having a home sleep test may make sense. If  you are more of a beginner in this field, then I often do recommend that you get a home  sleep testing unit. And the ideal way to do that is to find out whatever your community is  using in general. Now, if you've got multiple sleep doctors in your town, this could be a little  bit harder. But if you find out that they are using a WatchPAT ONE or the Alice or the Nox  T3 or whatever they're using, if you can get that device and use it, then that's awesome  because you're going to be comparing apples to apples. It's a little bit of a bummer if  they're using a Nox T3 and you're using a NightOwl, and these are very different systems.  And while theoretically both of them should be giving good data, it's just more likely that  they're not going to be the same.  [0:34:35]  So when you have the NightOwl that uses PAT technology, when you have that and you're  like, "Okay, this is all looking great." And now they go over and they get the traditional with  the effort belts and all that stuff, you could have different results. So I would encourage  you at the beginning to have the same unit that's going to be used for their follow-up if you  can.  Build Gradually   [0:34:58]  So this next suggestion may not be completely obvious, and you may immediately think,  "Well, I'm doing this already." So build gradually. You probably want your practice to be  growing faster than it is, maybe, maybe not. But the reason for starting off with your own  patients and caring very well for them, starting with your team members, their family mem -  bers, starting your family members, is you're going to really build a great reputation, and  09/01/25   Page   of 11   12

SSC 2.0 - 404: Earning Their Trust  you're already sending people that you trust to go there. You're going to be sending really  high-quality referrals. I'll talk more about that in a moment. But you're going to be working  with the doctors, with these patients that you're very familiar with at first.  [0:35:42]  And then that is going to build the confidence of the sleep doctors as they are then having  patients to refer back to you. One of the potential problems with trying to ramp up too  quickly is that you break your systems. Your systems aren't in place to handle a ton of  people. Let me give you an example from our own practice. Literally, as I'm recording this  right now, my three eldest sons are in our Boise practice. Now, this is not a build gradually  example. We've been practicing there for over 25 years, but I think you'll understand the  point. And that is that the practice is so busy. Last month, I think they started 132 sleep pa -  tients and then treated TMD patients on top of that. This month, they're on track to do even  more than that. And so all of my sons had to go there. All of them have worked in the prac -  tice at some point or another, and all of them worked in the lab as they were growing up.  So they've made hundreds, if not thousands of appliances at this point. And they are really  good. And they're trustworthy. And Cameron knows that he can count on them, that they're  going to be there, and that they're going to be working really, really hard.  [0:37:01]  And he's paying them more than he would typically pay someone else in that same role,  and actually paying for them to come to Boise because they live here in northern Utah,  where we do. And so why is he doing all of that? Because of that capacity issue. And one  could say that the system of employees and other things, that he's up against a breaking  point because of the number of people that are coming in. And thankfully, we have these  resources in my kids that he can lean on and take care of this. What do you have, though?  So if you build too quickly, you're going to strain your team members. If you're using billing  things and things like that, those can break down. Getting people in for follow-up becomes  hard if you don't have that capacity, you don't have enough chairs, you don't have enough  chair time. So take all of that into account. Be really logical and intentional on how you  build your dental sleep/TMD practice, and then you'll be fine. If you try to build too quickly,  all of a sudden you can find yourself getting poor care. And then it's what I call growing,  growing, gone. And what I mean by that is that you grow, grow, and then all of a sudden  people can't get in to see you, patients start to complain, they complain to your referral  sources, and now that is over.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 12   12

