SSC 2.0 - 406: Working with DME Companies  SSC 2.0   Level 4  406: Working with DME Companies  [intro music]  First Person to Know that Someone Won't Use Their CPAP?   [0:00:12]  So who is typically the first person to know that someone won't use their CPAP? I men -  tioned earlier that the sleep tech is sometimes the very first person to know as someone  rips it off during a titration study. But again, that's not done as much anymore. So the  CPAP companies, the DME companies, they tend to be the first ones to know. And now  let's go back to the idea of what do they want. Okay. And let me teach you a little bit on  how DME works and how CPAP works as far from a financial standpoint. And this is impor -  tant for you to wrap your brain around what can you do to help them. Typically, CPAP, and  as I've mentioned, APAP, is rented for the first 90 days. It's not always the case, but it's al -  most always the case. So the DME company is going to receive a little bit of money per  month on the rental. Then at 91 days, basically, there's going to need to be a download of  the information from that CPAP machine to show, to document that that patient's actually  using it. As of this recording, and this has been the same standard for quite a number of  years.  Four Hours a Night   [0:01:26]  So I don't expect this to change, but it could. In order to be compliant is considered four  hours a night, four nights a week. Okay, four hours, four nights. Now, you may think of that  and go, well, that's ridiculous. So, average person sleeps seven or eight hours. So you're  telling me that using CPAP less than half of the time is considered okay? Yeah. So that's  the standard is four hours a night, four nights a week. Now, from experience with this, most  patients use their CPAP every night if they're going to use it. CPAP tends to be a little bina -  ry here, like people love it and use it every night and wouldn't even consider going without  it, or they won't use it. That tends to be CPAP's world. Having said that, I was just talking  to... I was teaching a course this past weekend, and the person I was speaking with, Jeff  Wyscarver, who is a sleep technician and runs different sleep labs and does CPAP clinics  and whatnot and has been in the field for 20 plus years, probably longer than I have actu -  ally. And he used a CPAP and he showed his download and over a 30-day period, he's  used it like 26 times, it said. And then he's like, yeah, what was going on in those four days  that I didn't use it?  09/01/25   Page   of 1   13

SSC 2.0 - 406: Working with DME Companies  [0:02:59]  Like if he was using himself as an example, it's like if I was talking to the patient and this  was the same data, I wouldn't necessarily say, "Hey, good job on the 26 days." I would  say, "Hey, what happened on those four days?" And then he kind of talked about, in his  case, why he wasn't able to use it those four days. Well, he's way compliant. Now he  showed us that even the download takes this criteria into account. So it will only count a  day of use if it was over four hours. So if someone used the CPAP for three and a half  hours, it won't count that as a day. It will count that as three and a half hours. But the stan -  dard is more than four hours, more than four nights per week. So in a given month, that  means 16 days of the month you had to use that CPAP for more than four hours. If you  didn't use it more than four hours, then that didn't count as a day. All right. So who cares?  Well, who cares is the CPAP company, the DME company, is only going to get paid and be  able to continue charging for masks, hoses, stuff like that, if the patient meets that criteria  threshold.  [0:04:11]  So it's rented month one, month two, month three. And then as long as they show that  compliance threshold, then they get to buy the CPAP machine. So the insurance company  pays the DME company around $1,000 for that CPAP, whereas they were paying them not  very much, like 50 bucks maybe for that rental period those first couple months. Now, what  happens if the patient doesn't meet the threshold and is shown to be noncompliant? Well,  insurance won't pay for it. And so then the DME company takes it back. And I checked with  Jeff on this. I'm like, Okay, and then what? What happens to that machine? And he says  it's taken out of commission. It's done. It's it. And that's kind of crazy to me, right? So be -  cause of the nature of CPAP and it blowing air into you and you blowing air back into it to a  degree and stuff like that, they can't refurbish it. You would think they would be able to.  You'd think they'd be able to send it to a third world country or something and help people  out there at a drastically reduced cost or something. They can't. So they take these things  back and basically throw them in the trash.  [0:05:27]  Or they just put them someplace for, you know, in case they're needed one day down the  road for some emergency. Like when with COVID, there was a time that we were actually  helping collect CPAP units because they were refitting them to be used as ventilators. So,  anyway, the bottom line is, imagine that's your business, that you have these things that  cost you hundreds of dollars, you're only able to rent them for a couple months, and then if  the patient doesn't show compliance, then that's it. You're screwed. You paid this big  bunch of money up front, only got a small amount of money for the patient renting it, and  now it's coming back to you, and you can't give it to another patient. You just have to stick  it in the back room, and that's a complete loss for you. You're going to write it off, right? So  the DME companies are highly motivated to have people use their CPAP. So where do you  come in? I can help more of your patients use their CPAP. And what's cool is many insur -  ance companies will pay for both. There was a period of time where Medicare  [0:06:34]  09/01/25   Page   of 2   13

SSC 2.0 - 406: Working with DME Companies  Wouldn't, they called it same or similar, and they would only pay for one treatment or the  other. If that is the case again at some point down the road, or some insurance company  in your area is like, yeah, we won't pay for both, if that's the case, talk to your referring  doctors, track with me for a second, this might be slightly confusing. Talk to the referring  doctors and say, hey, so we did this with Medicare. You probably don't know this, doctor,  but Medicare will only pay for one treatment, either oral appliance therapy or CPAP. And if  they pay for CPAP first, they often won't pay for an oral appliance when the patient gives  up on CPAP because you sort of have to prove that CPAP didn't work for them, which  good luck proving that. The reason they're not using CPAP isn't that it didn't work, it's just  that they don't want to. And Medicare won't see that as a reason to give them another  treatment. Oral appliance therapy, on the other hand, if you give them that oral appliance  first, and then we do a follow-up sleep study, and let's say it takes their AHI from 20 to 6,  but they still have mild sleep apnea in that example. Well, you could then say that it didn't  work and Medicare will pay for a CPAP.  [0:07:48]  But guess what, doctor, we're not going to repossess the oral appliance. So they're going  to have an oral appliance and a CPAP. When it goes the other direction and they get CPAP  first, and then they don't use it, the CPAP is taken away from them, and then they might  not be able to get an oral appliance. Can you track with me there? So we had a lot of doc -  tors during that period that Medicare, that was their rule, where they would do oral appli -  ance therapy first because of exactly what I just said. An oral appliance was never a waste  of money. The oral appliance the patient would get to keep, it wasn't rented. The oral ap -  pliance, even if it didn't completely eliminate their sleep apnea, they could still use it in  conjunction with CPAP, and they could get the CPAP if they were shown that it wasn't ef -  fective completely. So that is something that you might consider. But again, back to my  story here, your goal is to help the patient use their CPAP, which the DME company cares  deeply about. Put yourself in their shoes. This would be terrible if patients are not tolerat -  ing their CPAP, and then you just have this constant loss of money on these patients.You  want them to use their CPAP long term.  What Problems Can You Help Solve?   [0:08:55]  And this is where that combination therapy comes in, that you're helping the patients use  their CPAP. The CPAP companies tend to work in direct connection with the sleep doctors.  Usually, there are way more people being put on CPAP than there are being sent for oral  appliances, typically. And you being part of this network and part of this connection and  helping the DME companies, it's a big deal, and that is working this relationship here.  How to Create Relationships with the Local DME Companies   [0:09:26]  09/01/25   Page   of 3   13

SSC 2.0 - 406: Working with DME Companies  And here's an idea that you might use, and this is what I've done with DME companies. Is  if you do have local durable medical equipment companies that are fitting people with  CPAP, and you can go and physically meet with the people who are doing that, then do a  breakfast and learn. Typically, you're not doing lunch and learns because these people are  out on the road and they're doing things, and often these are companies that also do home  oxygen and they do other things like that. But I'll meet with them in person, explain what  oral appliance therapy is. Sometimes these respiratory techs or these people that are fit -  ting CPAP, they may not have the greatest opinion of oral appliances because they've  been told by others that they've worked with in the past, yeah, those things don't work.  [0:10:05]  Remember, they're coming from a perspective of AHI of zero. That's what they're used to  seeing with CPAP is an AHI of zero. And when an oral appliance only gets them down to  10, but the patient started at 70, they're not that impressed because they're looking at  zero. So talk to them, and then all the stuff that I just talked about, that's what you're going  to present on is that oral appliances do work, and then you would really talk about combi -  nation therapy. And that would be the key thing they're going to want to hear. They're not  going to be that excited about just oral appliance therapy in and of itself, although they  may be, and you may treat one of them. Actually, we had DME providers over the years  that we've treated. They wore an oral appliance, even though they're out fitting CPAPs all  day long. So that could appeal to them personally, but just letting them know, "Hey, I can  help your patients use their CPAP, particularly in that critical 90 days so that you guys can  get paid." If you literally said that sentence out loud to them, they're going to be like, right  on. "Okay, thank you. You know what I care about, and you can help me." That's cool.  Word of Warning   [0:11:10]  Now, word of warning. You've spent the last couple hours learning how to work with sleep  doctors, work with DME companies, and I promise if you go to an American Academy of  Dental Sleep Medicine meeting and go into the exhibit hall, there's going to be any number  of companies that are going to say something like, "You don't need to do any of that. We'll  do it all for you. Our doc in Jersey, or put in some other state, will prescribe the appliance  and will make you the go-to dentist in your community." I can't tell you how many times I've  heard that, and it is a partial lie. It's not a complete lie, because they will connect you with  a doctor multiple states away, they will do a home sleep test, they'll mail them one, they  will maybe even prescribe the appliance. That last part though is the actual lie, that they're  going to make you the go-to dentist in your community. How would that even be? Does  that make sense to you at all?  [0:12:05]  09/01/25   Page   of 4   13

SSC 2.0 - 406: Working with DME Companies  Like if you had, let's say you had an orthodontist in your community, and the way that or -  thodontist worked is they advertised like crazy, they got all of their patients through market -  ing, never by direct referral because everybody thought that the dentist was not very nice,  they never communicated to the dentists in their community, they just treated people, and  they just went around the entire dental community. They just like didn't work with them at  all. Would you ever refer someone to that orthodontist? No way. You would go out of your  way to avoid that orthodontist. Now this is even worse than this, because at least in that  scenario, everything's local. What these companies are wanting you to do is to bypass  your local medical and dental communities, and they will take it. And this is very tempting,  because as you get into this, and this may be you right now, that you're like, you know  what, I have tried, Jamison, I have tried to go to the sleep doctors, there's someone like  you, Jamison, in my town, and all the referrals go to that person. Okay, well then don't do  that. Go through the primary care doctor, local primary care doctor.  [0:13:09]  You can connect a local primary care doctor with a reputable home sleep testing company  if locally you can't get someone in for a sleep test within a reasonable amount of time. That  primary care doctor could do that stuff, but the primary care doctor and you are going to be  the ones working that patient through. Do not buy this idea that you working without estate  doctors and them referring or prescribing therapy. Here's the thing, if there's ever a prob -  lem with that patient, I guarantee you the doctor from five states away that prescribed the  therapy is not going to get on a plane to come join you when you're standing in front of the  board of dentistry to explain yourself. Okay, on the other hand, if your local primary care  doctor is the one that's been working this case with you and some problem does arise,  they're going to go with you to that board of dentistry meeting and explain, "Hey, Jamison  is fulfilling the prescription. I'm the one that ordered the oral appliance therapy. Here's why  I did this. I understand that this patient has had some sort of complication, but I stand by  my decision to prescribe oral appliance therapy.” That will happen. The doctor from five  states away, no way will that happen. So be careful when you go out there. There is no  easy button is the bottom line. There is no easy button. This takes time to build, but you  can do it.  Difficult Roads Often Lead to Beautiful Destinations   [0:14:35]  And difficult roads often lead to beautiful destinations. I'm not going to tell you that this is  easy, but I am going to tell you it's worth it. And as you go through this and build and build  and build and build, you are building something that you can really be proud of and that at  some point someone else can come in and maybe that's a family member or maybe your  kids, like I'm actually looking at my kids taking over our practices, even though they aren't  dentists, but that they would be able to run those practices and have dentists working for  them and really building a legacy that we can be proud of for generations to come. You  09/01/25   Page   of 5   13

SSC 2.0 - 406: Working with DME Companies  can do the same thing. There's nothing special about us. The thing that's special about us,  I guess, is we want you to do the same thing. We want to give you the same skills and  tools that we've had in order to do the same thing.  [0:15:19]  And there is plenty of people out there to help. Just because you might even have some -  one like me in your community. So I gave an example a little while ago of our Boise prac -  tice, fitting well over 100 people per month. That is a fraction of the number of people di -  agnosed with sleep apnea each month in the Boise area. A fraction. And then think about  the number of people who are never diagnosed, who just have this problem and nobody  knows about it. For 20 years, the American Academy of Sleep Medicine is saying that 80%  of those with sleep apnea are undiagnosed. For 20 years, they've said that. In other  words, we're not moving the needle on that. And then every year, unfortunately, people  tend to get a little fatter. I mean that the overall obesity rates get higher. And then there's  more people with this problem. And all sorts of things are leading towards – I saw an arti -  cle the other day that even claimed that global warming and climate change and stuff was  going to lead to far more sleep apnea. They kind of got there on a securitist route, but  whatever. There's all sorts of things that are adding together to make it so that this is a  massive epidemic. And there aren't that many people chipping away at it. So do it right,  and you will be rewarded accordingly.  Patient Who Won’t Go to See a Sleep Doctor   [0:16:53]  And lastly, what about people who just won't go? You talk to them and maybe you want to  work with a sleep doctor, maybe you want to work with a primary care doctor, and the pa -  tient's just like, no way, not gonna do it. So here's what I would suggest. You don't just kind  of write them off, but I would tell them that I can still possibly treat them, but this is going to  be for their bruxism, ideally. But insurance won't help them, and it will be X out of pocket. If  they agree to that upfront fee, then tell them you'll contact their family doctor to discuss op -  tions. And here's why that last part.  Provisional Mandibular Advancement Devices   [0:17:32]  So, as of the recording here, oral appliances like on the screen here, so I happen to have  a Silent Night and an EMA on the screen, but all oral appliances for snoring and sleep ap -  nea are FDA-cleared for snoring and sleep apnea. So these are prescription-only devices.  There is some debate on if that prescription is from a dentist or physician. I believe that a  dentist's prescription is fine. What I mean by that is you don't have to have a medical doc -  tor's prescription to get an oral appliance. Now that is readily obvious because any lab in  the world, or any lab in the United States for sure, will give you an oral appliance without a  09/01/25   Page   of 6   13

SSC 2.0 - 406: Working with DME Companies  prescription from a physician. You don't have to send Glidewell, "Hey, here's the records  and oh, by the way, here's the prescription from the sleep doctor, give me a Silent Night."  That's not the way it works. You order a Silent Night as a dentist, and they're going to send  you that Silent Night. And they're following the FDA rules. So the FDA never ever said that  it had to be prescription-only from a medical doctor. That's been misinterpreted. However,  if we look at a Silent Night or an EMA or any of the other devices on the market, it's going  to say that this thing has been approved for mild to moderate sleep apnea and a couple of  them severe sleep apnea. You might be using this sort of off-label.  [0:18:59]  And the crossroads I have here is diagnosis and treatment. At this point, so the patient that  we have here that won't go for a consultation, like you're just like, "Hey, would you be open  to just having a conversation with the sleep doctor or with this primary care doctor that I  work with about your possible sleep apnea?" And they're like, "Nope, I'm not." Okay. You  don't know if they have sleep apnea or not. So you're not treating them for sleep apnea.  You could be treating them for their snoring, but I'd be careful with that too. Just because,  again, someone could be like, well, if they snore, Jamison, that probably means they have  sleep apnea. But what you could do is treat them with one of these appliances for their  bruxism. And we don't really treat bruxism anyway. We just protect the teeth. So is a dou -  ble tray system superior to a single tray system as far as protecting the teeth goes? Well,  maybe you could make an argument that it is. And then the really strong argument you  could make is, well, there's no literature that supports a single arch appliance reducing  bruxism behavior. But there's a lot of evidence that supports a so-called mandibular ad -  vancement device reducing rhythmic mass or muscle activity, reducing bruxism muscle  activity. That we have a lot of research on.  [0:20:23]  So therefore, I am using one of these devices for their bruxism. I'm actually treating the  bruxism. That would be your argument. And that's what you would write in your chart. Now,  perhaps by the time you watch this, one of my dreams is I'm trying to work with a company  to create a mandibular stabilization appliance, which is going to look exactly like one of  these mandibular advancement devices, but the goal of it won't be adjusting it forward.  The goal of it will be just keeping the jaw from falling backwards. So you'll take a bite  record at habitual occlusion, and it will be made in such a way to have little bands or what -  ever the mechanism it is to keep the jaw from falling backwards, but your goal isn't to bring  it forward. And that would be, I believe, an ideal bruxism appliance, and there will be peo -  ple that that helps their bruxism because you're actually helping their airway. Now, where  this provisional treatment comes in and diagnosis is let's say we've got our patient that is,  that I've put here as kind of the Eeyore fella here, the jackass that is not going forward as  you are encouraging them to do, and you give them this appliance for their bruxism, and  you come back and like, "Hey, how's it going?"  [0:21:43]  Well, most people can't tell you if they're grinding their teeth more or less, right? That's not  something that people can tell you, but you could ask, "Is there any difference in your  09/01/25   Page   of 7   13

SSC 2.0 - 406: Working with DME Companies  snoring? And how are you feeling?" And if the patient says, "Well, you know what, the wife  said that my snoring is way better, and I'll be darned if I don't feel better." Okay, well, now  you've got more data, don't you? So you were suspecting they might have an issue. Now  the reaction they've had to your treatment almost confirms that they have an issue. It at  least leads you down a road of saying, okay, based on that, gosh, I'm even more con -  vinced that you have a problem. I'm going to call your doctor. So that's when we call the  primary care doctor, the primary care doctor, say, hey, got Jamison over here, common pa -  tient. I talked to him about getting in to see you for a conversation about possibly having a  sleep study or going to local sleep doctor. He's like, no, thank you. But he had some wear  on his teeth and thought he might be clenching and grinding his teeth. I gave him an appli -  ance that keeps his jaw from falling backwards.  [0:22:49]  So that's kind of state of the art for bruxism nowadays is something that keeps our jaw  from falling backwards to protect the airway in case there's a connection there. He came  back and said that not only does he think he might be clenching and grinding his teeth  less, but that his bed partner says his snoring is improved and he even feels better  throughout the day. That makes me think he might have an airway issue while he's asleep.  He might have sleep apnea. You know his medical history better than I do. What do you  think the next step should be? And that's it. And you just kind of drop right there and then  let the primary care doctor decide. Many primary care doctors will say, "Well, you know  what? I don't think that we need to do a sleep study. It sounds like the oral appliance that  you're treating the patient with is doing great. Why don't you just keep doing that?" And  then you could actually say, "Hey, since we think this patient though might have some un -  derlying sleep-related breathing disorder, could you do me a huge favor? Because at this  point, that means I'm kind of segueing from this bruxism deal, that's clearly a dental issue,  to this snoring sleep apnea deal.  [0:23:51]  Could you do me a huge favor, doctor, and just scribble out on an RX pad, oral appliance  for snoring, shoot that over to me just so I can have that in the records to indicate that  we're working collaboratively on this." Now, I've only had like maybe one or two physicians  ever that have said, no, I'm not really comfortable doing that. That's because they didn't  really understand, like they didn't want to be liable for prescribing this, but that's rare. Usu -  ally, and especially if you have any rapport there with the primary care doctor, they're  gonna be like, "Yeah, I get it, that's fine." Even if they didn't, you could say, okay, but, so  let's say the physician's like, "Yeah, no, I'm not comfortable sending over a prescription for  that, I don't wanna do that." Okay, cool, but as far as you're concerned, as of this date  anyway, the patient doesn't, you don't believe the patient needs to have a sleep study, you  think just continue doing what we're doing. Yeah, I think that's fine. I don't think they need  a sleep study. Okay, cool, and then I would document, spoke to the patient's physician on  this date, talked about a possible sleep study  [0:24:57]  09/01/25   Page   of 8   13

SSC 2.0 - 406: Working with DME Companies  Patient's physician does not feel that a sleep study is indicated at this time, continuing  treating the patient with the oral appliance for their bruxism, and then that's it, okay? So  that is something you can do with these patients like, eh, I really don't wanna go forward.  And why would someone not wanna go forward? Well, the biggest reason is they don't  wanna be diagnosed with sleep apnea. And you're gonna have patients that really want  treatment and don't want a diagnosis, okay? You know who those people often are? Peo -  ple like us, professionals. So if you or I go in and get a sleep study, and we have sleep ap -  nea, and that's now on our records, then Blue Cross, you know, it's like, oh, you got sleep  apnea. And every like little form that you fill out for the rest of your life on getting insurance  or anything like that, it's like, oh, sleep apnea, I got that. And they're gonna charge you  more for it, and there could be other problems. Let's say that you were a private pilot. That  could be a massive issue for you to continue having your pilot's license. So a lot of profes -  sionals don't wanna have anything to do with that.  [0:26:05]  Whereas people that work for a company and have corporate insurance and stuff like that,  they may not care as much. But that may surprise you that a lot of the people that would  be like, no, no, I'm not really interested in that. They may be attorneys, CPAs, doctors,  things like that. And frankly, we've treated lots of doctors, and I mean lots of doctors, with  no sleep study. Because the doctor themself is kind of like, yeah, I think I have a problem. I  haven't gotten a sleep study or whatever, but I'd really like to try an oral appliance. Okay,  you know, you're calling the shots of your own care. Let's treat you. And then why they're  very confident in doing that is because they know that if they feel tremendously better and  their snoring is basically gone, probably their sleep apnea is better too. You want to be  smart though, and document accordingly what's going on. And you do not want to have in  your records, I'm treating the patient for snoring and have no comment in there about talk -  ing to their physician, because now you're getting into kind of medical world that could  come back to bite you.  [0:27:11]  So I don't like dentists ever treating patients for their snoring. And I know that tens of thou -  sands, if not hundreds of thousands, if not millions of people have been treated at this  point for their snoring by dentists who just didn't know any better. And maybe you treated  people with a snore guard, so-called, usually a silent night from Glidewell is often called  the snore guard, and you were treating their snoring and you didn't kind of go through all of  this pathway that I've talked about. Okay, okay, that was then. This is now, from now on  forward, you are smarter. You are no longer ignorant to these things, so you need to treat  people accordingly. And I'm not saying you can't give somebody oral appliance therapy for  their snoring, but you would just want to document it so that you are fully dental and that  once you are aware that you are treating a possible medical disorder, you at the very, very  least have a conversation with their primary care doctor to make sure that you're all on the  same page. You would never, ever, ever, I never want you in your career to have some -  body that like later on, it's like,  [0:28:15]  09/01/25   Page   of 9   13

SSC 2.0 - 406: Working with DME Companies  Oh my   goodness, yeah, this dentist fit the patient with an oral appliance, never discuss this  with me, this patient has super severe sleep apnea, they recently had a stroke, if only they  would have gotten in for a sleep study, this could have been avoided. You know, that den -  tist is liable for some of this here. Now, knock on wood, I've never heard that happening to  anybody. I don't want you to be the first person that happens to, so just be smart, work  with your medical community, work with your local medical community, and everything will  be cool.  Unique Selling Proposition   [0:28:45]  And then one last thing, this is something that I usually share with our Business Elite  members. We have our Business Elite Essentials group, and then we have our alumni  group, what we call our BEAST group, and this is something that I've shared with them  from the beginning, and I want to share this with you now so that you can kind of give  some thought of what you are trying to create. And from the beginning, I've alluded to the,  if you had someone like me near you. So let's say that you do, that you've got someone  that has built these relationships in your community, knows the sleep doctors, maybe  they're the president of the local sleep society.  [0:29:26]  You've got someone and you're like, man, how can I ever compete with that? Well, the an -  swer is you can't. You can't compete with that because they've already created something  that is superior, frankly, to what you can create at that same way that they've done it. So  this is called unique selling proposition. And as you see here, we have at the top what your  brand, what your practice does well, what the consumer wants, what the patient wants,  and what your competition does well, what the other dentist does well. So what your brand  does well, what the consumer wants, and what the competitor does well. So the winning  zone is over here, and that is what you do well and what the patient wants. So let's say  that you are in one of my areas, you're in the Boise, Idaho area or the Salt Lake City, Utah  area, and you want to build your practice, but we are, what we do well is we know every -  body and we're networked with all the insurances. And this is something that patients  want. Patients like us being in network with insurance. They like that we have those con -  nections with the sleep doctors and whatnot.  [0:30:52]  That is going to be a tough thing for you to do. So that would put you down into this zone  we'll talk about in a second, where we, your competition, we do that frankly better than you  do. So you wouldn't want to compete there. Your winning zone, you would choose to be  doing something different than us. So let me go through the rest of these areas here, and  then we'll talk about what that might look like. So that losing zone I just mentioned, that's  where your so-called competition is doing something and they would do it better than you.  A good example of that might be their network with all the medical insurance companies.  09/01/25   Page   of 10   13

SSC 2.0 - 406: Working with DME Companies  You're not. You're a fee-for-service dentist. You're not going to work with any medical in -  surance company. Then we also have the risky zone. This is highly competitive. So the  risky zone is there right in the center, and it's like basically everybody does this well and  the consumer wants it. So this could be office hours and having a nice office and a clean  office and friendly staff and things like that.  [0:31:58]  These are all things that kind of everybody wants, and hopefully everybody strives to have.  And frankly, this is kind of the risky zone or highly competitive zone, but it's also the ex -  pected zone. Your patients expect certain things. And so like, for example, if you only see  patients Thursday afternoon, it's going to be tough to grow your practice because the ex -  pectation is going to be that you're going to be more available than only Thursday after -  noons. So that could be a problem. So the center there is things that all of us should be  able to do well that also patients just expect as normal. They don't think that it's special.  They just think that that's normal. Okay, and then lastly, we have our who cares zone, and  the who cares zone is, you know, you do it well, your competition does well, and also pa -  tients don't even care. So you're doing all this stuff. Patients are like, eh, who cares? One  thing that I think of with this is it's funny to me how many practices, and I've even been  guilty of this, although it wasn't directly my fault, but having a picture of the waiting room  on their website.  [0:33:14]  Why I say that wasn't directly my fault is after we remodeled our office in Boise, Dr.  Kuehne was really involved in that, and our waiting room in our Boise office is beautiful.  And I've seen this in so many other offices where there is prominently on their website is  like, here's our waiting room. I think that's kind of dumb because it's like, I don't want to  wait. Have you ever been impressed by a waiting room and then you get to wait? That's  baloney, right? I would rather get to wherever I'm going to meet with somebody and I go  up to the receptionist or whatever and they say, oh yeah, you know, doctor will see you  now. You know, the lawyer will see you now. The CPA will see you now. The professional  will see you now. That's what I'd like. I'd like to never have to sit in a waiting room. So that  is kind of the who cares is I could go to different offices that all have beautiful waiting  rooms as a consumer in that business. I'm like, all right, I don't care that you have a nice  waiting room.  [0:34:18]  I want to see the person here, okay? So don't go there. All right, now let's get back to you.  You want to be this winning zone here. So let's use my practice as an example. So I'll be  your competition and this is the losing zone here. So in that example, the losing zone, if  you were in our area, would be frankly to try to work with insurance because we already do  that better than anyone else because that's all we do for a living. And it'd be very, very dif -  ficult for you to do that. As a matter of fact, in our Utah practice, as of the date of me  recording this, there's one massive insurance company that they have a closed network.  So if you lived here and you wanted to work with that insurance company, you can't. That's  a major disadvantage. If all of a sudden you're trying to work with insurance, but then 30%  09/01/25   Page   of 11   13

SSC 2.0 - 406: Working with DME Companies  of your customer base, 30% of your patients have this other insurance and you couldn't  work with them if you wanted to. You have to refer those patients to my practice anyway.  So the area that you could win in, though, is not working with.  [0:35:27]  Insurance, but what does that mean? So typically, if you are working with insurance, you  have to have a lot of team members. Fittings need to be done by team members. You  need to kind of run more of an orthodontic type of practice where the doctors are really just  focused on decision making and examinations and evaluations and treatment planning,  and they aren't doing a lot of the technical stuff themselves because they don't have time.  What you would do is you would lean into the, it's all about you, that you are the one that,  maybe even to the level of taking records, although that's not completely necessary, but  you would be the one that would fit the patient with the appliance. You would talk to them  about this. You would see them for follow-up. You would do the telemedicine yourself. You  would do it all yourself, and you would lean into that. You would have a smaller staff. You  would charge a lot more money for that care, but it would have a real concierge level feel  versus a insurance feel, and you would lean into that. No, we don't work with insurance.  We have all of our patients kind of come to us because we're not limited by what insurance  requires.  [0:36:37]  Insurance makes us use certain appliances, things like that. We're not willing to do that.  We don't work with insurance. If insurance is the most important thing to you, I'll send you  to my friend, Jamison Spencer. They're in network with your insurance. If the quality of the  care that you receive and you really appreciate a personal relationship with the dentist  who's treating you, if that's what you want, we're the right place for you. Okay, does that  make sense? So this is another area that I've seen dentists fall down is they think that they  have to kind of follow like our model, and you don't. If you have three operatories, you will  never have a practice like mine, and that may be impressive that I talked a little bit a while  ago about, yeah, our practice is on track to do $6 million. I don't say that to try to impress  you. I say that to impress upon you the nature of our practice and the capacity that we  have. And I told you about my kids having to go there and help seeing the patients be -  cause we have so many patients that we're seeing and it's kind of problematic to have to  see all these people.  [0:37:44]  And again, you're like, yeah, cry me a river. That sounds like a great problem to have. It is  a good problem to have. I'm not complaining, but it's just a different model. Whereas if you  had a couple, if you only have three seats, you're never going to be able to have that ca -  pacity, so don't try. If you tried to do that, you would quickly run out of capacity, and then  you have a problem because people can't get in to see you, and then your options are ei -  ther to go get a bigger office. Now, that's what I did. I started out in like 1,200 square feet,  and then we moved to a 5,000 square foot building. Now our building's about the same.  We just kind of reorganized it and built a newer building that's really beautiful. But we've  been in three locations in my career, and the reason for those moves was to increase ca -  09/01/25   Page   of 12   13

SSC 2.0 - 406: Working with DME Companies  pacity and be able to see more people. Figure out what you want. How many days a week  do you want to go to work? How many employees do you want to have? We have a bajil -  lion employees, and we have turnover all the time.  [0:38:43]  I was just talking to my partner today. We were going over financial stuff, which we do  every month with our CFO, Dr. With Danny Richards of CFO Dental Partners. I highly rec -  ommend him, by the way, for you. We were going over everything, and he mentioned, he's  like, yeah, we just had two employees quit, and these were recent hires. We've been  blessed to have the vast majority of our team members are with us forever. I've had a cou -  ple team members now retire that were with me for 25 years, and we have other team  members that have been with us over 20 years and multiple over 10 years. Nevertheless,  we do have, because we have so many employees, we do have a few employees or posi -  tions, rather, where there's some turnover. These happen to be clinical people. My boys  are there helping out. My boys are super hard workers. They are in there taking care of  everything, and they're really good at it. Frankly, I'm pretty sure that these other two people  saw their level of work ethic and putting the effort into it and then decided, I can't do that. I  don't want to do that.  [0:39:54]  I don't want to work that hard. They literally just kind of texted in their resignation of like,  Yeah, "I don't think this is going to work for me." One of them kind of made up an excuse  of needing to do something else, but the other one was like, yeah, "I can't handle this  pace." You don't need to go down that road. There is one best way to do dental sleep med -  icine, and that's the best way for you right now. That may be different five years from now,  but I want you to think through what do I want it to look like five years from now? What do I  want it to look like 10 years from now? Then backtrack from there. Think of what you want  to build, and then write up the blueprints, and then go forward accordingly. Don't just start  building something and then start changing your mind as you're building. Much, much bet -  ter to think of what you want, make that blueprint, and then go accordingly. Okay, I hope  that was helpful. I hope you will take this very seriously of working with your local medical  and dental community, becoming respected in your local medical dental community. That  will pay you dividends like nothing else. The reason that we're able to do what we are in  our practices is because we are respected in our own towns. Otherwise, there's no way we  would be able to have built the practices that we have and that we continue to build. Okay,  take care.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 13   13

