SSC 2.0 - 407: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 1  SSC 2.0   Level 4  407: Practical Principles of Pro fi tability for  Sleep & TMD Part 1  [intro music]  Practical Principles of Profitability   [0:00:12]  Hello and welcome to Practical Principles of Profitability for Dental Sleep Medicine and  TMD. The reason we have this section is because when there is no money, there is no  mission. There are a lot of people who get into dental sleep because they are well-inten -  tioned, they're well-meaning, they maybe took a course from me or someone like me that  got them all excited about saving lives and the ideals of helping people with airway prob -  lems, and then they start doing it, and next thing you know, they are making less money in  their dental practice because they're really actually passionate about this aspect of den -  tistry, this new found passion that they have about helping people in this way that they  perhaps haven't done before. But in that they are spending more time with their patients, in  that they maybe don't quite understand how to do the billing just yet. Maybe they are trying  to work with insurance and the insurance is not paying them because of some thing that  they did or didn't do.  [0:01:22]  All of these things can kind of culminate into their accountant saying, "Hey, heads up,  you're down X percentage this year over what you were doing last year at the same time.  What's up with that?" And this is critically important. I would say that probably every year.  And I know the leadership in the Academy of Dental Sleep Medicine, and they've told me  that this has been the case for a while, that about the same number of people join the  ADSM as leave, as do not re-up their membership. And in my experience with teaching  people around the U.S., the main reason that people give up on helping people with sleep-  related breathing disorders is because of getting paid. They don't understand how to im -  plement this in their practice. And this is critically important. Now, I've shared this with you  before. And when I do things like this, please understand that I'm not trying to brag or try to  impress you or something like that. But I think it's important for you to know real numbers,  to know that, "Hey, in Jamison's practices where they actually do this for a living, there is a  possibility that you can do this profitably."  [0:02:47]  So, as you probably know, I don't go to the practice and haven't for years. I have partners  that run my Boise practice, which is the one that I bought back in 1998 right out of dental  school. Practiced by myself for over a decade. And then Dr. Kuehne, my nephew,  09 /01/25   Page   of 1   16

SSC 2.0 - 407: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 1  Cameron Kuehne, joined me in that practice. We worked together for a few years. And  then actually I had other opportunities that I pursued in education and helping some group  dental practices and being a consultant for a large sleep apnea clinic. equipment company.  And so I've done other things. And then we were in North Carolina for a while helping a  large group practice out there, moved to Utah.  [0:03:41]  When we moved to Utah, an opportunity came available. I had someone reach out to me  who had a limited TMD practice, an icon in the Utah area, and we bought his practice,  Cameron and I did. I did run that practice for about four months, going into the practice  every day myself. So I can actually see patients and do these things that we talk about all  the time. I've treated thousands and thousands of patients and still do have those skills. It  is a bit like riding a bike. And then once we found Dr. Mangelson, who I connected with at  an army course, and then he was able to come and take over the practice. And so Kevin  runs the Salt Lake City practice, Cameron runs the Boise practice. The Salt Lake practice,  when we bought it, the doctor who had been running it for many, many years  [0:04:35]  I was doing around $700,000-ish, $750,000, purely TMD, no dental sleep medicine at all,  not working with insurance at all. It was all a cash boutique type of practice. Doing fine,  very low overhead, only had a couple staff members, and did well in that practice. In 2025,  as I'm recording this, that practice is on pace to collect around $2 million this year. And we  acquired that in the very end of 2018. So more than double, almost triple that practice at  this point. Our Boise, and that's one doctor. Our Boise practice is on track this year to col -  lect in excess of $4 million. Again, one single doctor in that practice. So far in 2025, we've  had best month after best month after best month compared to last year. Last year was  our best year. The year before that was our best year. And I'll share some principles with  you throughout this discussion and in things with members of Spencer Study Club that I  work very closely with.  [0:05:48]  With them on their practices. Now, again, the reason I share some of those numbers with  you is to try to impress upon you that this is doable. You can do this for a living. We don't  do any general dentistry in our practices at all. We don't do any crowns. We don't do  braces. We don't do any of that stuff. We only do sleep and TMD. As a matter of fact, in  our Utah practice, it is probably 60% TMD, 40% sleep. Our Boise practice is the opposite,  about 60% sleep, 40% TMD. You can do this and you can do this at a high level and you  can do this very, very profitably while working with insurance even. So our practices, we  are in network with insurance. So it's not all boutique cash on the barrel head type of stuff,  which is more typical of TMD practicing. Our TMD is mostly fee for service and we'll talk  about that as we go through here. Sleep, we are in network with insurance.  [0:06:53]  Having a profitable practice is possible. Doing dental sleep and TMD as part of your  restorative practice is possible, but you need to be smart. So that's what we're going to talk  about in this section here is how to be profitable. Once again, if there's no money, there's  09 /01/25   Page   of 2   16

SSC 2.0 - 407: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 1  no mission. You're only going to do an expensive hobby for so long before you have to fo -  cus in on, hey, really, this doesn't make a lot of sense. I need to do stuff here that's going  to help me pay my staff take care of my family, things like that. I want dental, sleep medi -  cine, and TMD to be that thing that you do this not only because you're massively helping  people, but that it's the smartest and best thing for you to do for your practice.  Great Team   [0:07:37]  Now, let me start off with the biggest secret to having a profitable practice, and that is hav -  ing a great team. It is challenging. I wouldn't say impossible, but challenging to do dental  sleep and TMD completely by yourself. You could, but where most people kind of fall down  is they try to do everything themselves per se, but then they have multiple team members.  I've seen this multiple times where the dentist is kind of doing everything, but then they  have assistants like watching them. So if you're going to do everything, then lean into it  and actually do everything. And keep a really, really trim staff so that you don't have a lot of  overhead. On the other hand, if you want to see a whole bunch of people, then you're go -  ing to tend to have a bigger team. And we'll talk about capacity issues and things like that.  So all of these things you need to keep in mind when you are making your decisions.  Insurance Pricing   [0:08:33]  All right, so let's talk a little bit about insurance pricing. Now, this is a whole different animal  compared to boutique or compared to just fee-for-service. With fee-for-service pricing  model, you can come up with whatever you feel good about and charge that. With insur -  ance, it's kind of weird. So you may not know this, but your fee has to be higher than what  the insurance contracts with you for. Now, this may not always be the case. There are  some cases where the insurance says, "Yeah, we're going to pay you, let's say $2,600 and  they'll pay you $2,600 and you could bill them $2,600 and they would pay you $2,600."  However, it's not uncommon for there to be some fine print in there that says, "We will pay  you $2,600 or 80% of what you bill if it's below $2,600.”  [0:09:30]  So in other words, we'll pay you up to a maximum of X or we'll pay you a percent of Y if  that's below X. Okay, so keep that in mind. And this is very, very confusing for most den -  tists because they haven't dealt with that. But I remember distinctly having to raise our  Medicare fees substantially in order to get what Medicare would actually pay. That if we  were billing out $1,800, let's say at the time, they would pay us less than what they would  pay us if we billed $2,500. It's super weird. It's like they wanted us to charge more so that  the patient could see a differential or something like that. As a matter of fact, I think some -  times insurance companies.  09 /01/25   Page   of 3   16

SSC 2.0 - 407: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 1  [0:10:18]  Really want that. They want to see that high bill on there so that then when they send the  explanation of benefits to the patient, and that's why it's even called that, so it's the bene -  fits that that patient has by paying for their insurance every month, they like it to be like,  hey, look, this was 10 grand, and then here's your contracted rate or whatever, and you. It  was only $2,000 and we paid that $2,000 or we paid this portion of that $2,000. And the  patient's perception is, oh my gosh, if I would have had you do that on my own, that would  have been 10 grand. Now, those of us in the field, we know that there's a cash rate and  that's fascinating because like, for example, an MRI, if you refer a patient for an MRI, a  MRI under their insurance is going to be $2,600.  [0:11:09]  A cash MRI is going to be more like $600. Okay? So keep that in mind with your pricing if  you're going to work with insurance. Now, usually the easiest way to do this is you just find  whatever insurance company is the highest in your area. Let's say that you have one that  is paying you $3,200 and you figure out the math that in order to actually collect all $3,200  from that insurance company, you need to charge $4,200. Well, then you would just make  that fee your fee across the board. And any insurance company that's paying less than  that, again, they're not going to have a problem with you billing 4,200 because they've con -  tracted with you for 2,600, 2,800, 1,800, whatever it is. Okay? I hope that makes sense.  [0:11:51]  But that would be your fee for everyone. And then what that means is if down the road that  insurance company pays you more, you're able to negotiate to get paid more, you would  then need to up your fee and then that would be your new fee for everyone. As I just men -  tioned with the MRI centers, if you want to have a cash fee, you can. You need to be  slightly careful with that because sometimes patients will kind of say, well, yeah, I'll do the  cash fee. And then they will turn around and say, well, I need you to bill my insurance. like,  "No, this was about the cash fee." So just be a little bit careful with that. Now, arrow num -  ber two here, do not overcharge insurance. So this does have a top end to it, so to speak.  So let's say in the scenario of in giving and 4,200 is your fee because you're getting 3,200  from insurance, it doesn't do anybody any good for you to bill out $12,000.  [0:12:47]  And like I said, sometimes there's a case there where it's like, yeah, I swear the insurance  company almost wants to see that differential, but not all the time. And you're going to be  marked as a massive outlier because the insurance company, just like they do with den -  tistry, they're going to kind of pull all of this in there and they're going to have a little bit of a  bell curve and they're going to be like, whoa, you're way out here as an outlier. What are  you doing charging that much? Now, if you're contracted with them, they're still only going  to pay you that contracted rate. So again, higher but not massively higher. And also kind of  with this same theme, make sure you're doing everything correctly. There are a lot of com -  panies out there that will encourage you to build things that you shouldn't. They'll give you  a code, like for example, a classic…  [0:13:37]  09 /01/25   Page   of 4   16

SSC 2.0 - 407: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 1  As of 2025 is some billing companies saying, well, you should bill out the morning, what I  call a morning reprogrammer, what others may call a morning occlusal guide or something  like that. And they'll actually use a TMD code. And that TMD code is not even close to what  this thing is doing. There is no code for why you are using a morning reprogrammer.  There's no medical code for that. Now, will it be paid? Yeah, it could because the way  medical insurance works is they match up a diagnosis code and a treatment code. So as  long as the diagnosis code, as long as that treatment code is in the family of codes that  are payable for that diagnosis, then it will be covered. Now, if you're ever audited though,  they're going to look at that and be like, "What is this thing?" Because the code that you  used was for a surgical splint.  [0:14:32]  And this doesn't seem to have anything to do with that, nor did the patient have surgery.  So just be careful with that. Now, next I have negotiate your fees.There are people that are  really good at this and have had incredible experiences with this and there are other peo -  ple that are not as good at this or have not had good experience with that and actually in  my office in Boise, we've had both and Utah as well. So it varies from insurance company  to insurance company and we had, I'll give you one example, where Blue Cross of Idaho,  we had been getting paid the same amount for literally a decade.  [0:15:12]  And when we went to them and said, "Hey, we've heard that it's not uncommon to have  fees raised a little bit each year to at least keep up with inflation and stuff and cost of living  expenses and ours have never been changed." They're like, "Oh yeah, right on. We should  absolutely look at that." And then I swear to you, this took over two years. And they played  us along and they kind of gave us an idea that they were going to up it to around $2,500.  And then at the end of the process, again, them jerking us along for years, they then came  back and it was, I swear to you, $85 more than what they were paying us. That's it. After  multiple years of just playing with us a little bit. And then it was like, and you need to sign  this like right now, like, you know, we need this back within 48 hours or, you know, it's null  and void. That really ticked us off.  [0:16:08]  Now, on the other hand, I have lots of members of Spencer Study Club who have gone to  the insurance and said, "Hey, can't do it for the amount that you're paying here." And they  have had actually positive experiences where the insurance company is like, "All right,  well, what can you do it for? Let's talk here." And sometimes there's occasions where it's  been a dramatic increase, two, three times what they were paying. Other times the insur -  ance company is basically like, "Well, okay, tough. I guess you aren't in network anymore.”  definitely worth a while to try to negotiate. Now a little pearl right there is if you aren't in  network with the insurance you probably aren't going to negotiate. Now sometimes, there  is an exception to this, if there is no one in the area, you are the only show in town in a  relatively rural area, then they might. They might talk to you and let you know in advance,  "Hey, this is negotiable. Here's our normal, what we pay, but for you, we can talk." So don't  09 /01/25   Page   of 5   16

SSC 2.0 - 407: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 1  be shy in asking those questions. Just don't be terribly surprised if you've never worked  with them in network.  [0:17:17]  If they don't seem to have any interest in discussing or negotiating where they just say,  yeah, it's this much and take it or leave it. That is more common for the kind of take it or  leave it type of model. Once you are in network with them and build a relationship, and  that's the next point here is remember raving fans. When on the raving fans stuff, when I  talk about that, of course you want your referral sources to be raving fans, you want your  patients to be raving fans. You also want insurance companies to be raving fans if you're  going to work with insurance. And that means being nice to them and treating them with  respect and not being a jerk.  [0:17:57]  And that goes double, triple, quadruple for your staff members. If you have a team mem -  ber that has a little bit of a hothead, I wouldn't have them be the one talking to insurance  companies for you because they can kind of be blackballed and just like, "Yeah, this Dr.  Spencer's office, he's got a real jerk working there. We're not going to help them out at all."  A lot of things with insurance, I have found that the doctor getting on the phone can have a  lot better impact or a lot better outcome than a team member. The person on the other  side of the phone will tend to treat doctors different and usually in my experience better,  but I think it's how you attack that, how you go into that. So that's just a little bit about pric -  ing with insurance that is different than if you just had a fee for service practice or just de -  cided, well, this is the fee I'm gonna charge.  Practice   [0:18:52]  So now let's talk about your practice, what you want to do, and how you're going to set that  up to be profitable. So I want to talk about knowing your target. And let's look at this a little  bit from an insurance standpoint here. At first, many of you for dental sleep medicine will  have a desire to work with insurance just so you can see more patients and so that more  doctors will refer to you. If you are fee-for-service, you can skip this stuff. But if you are go -  ing to work with insurance, then here's some of the things that we're going to look at. So,  as you're getting started, which insurance companies pay the most? You should have kind  of what we call a payer mix. And you're going to know that like this one is our highest, this  one is our lowest.  [0:19:36]  Once you know that, then number two, which plans or employers have the lowest out of  pocket? That's also something to consider. So for example, one insurance company that I  worked with out in North Carolina, the patient would only have a $50 copay to be treated in  our office. That's it. That was the whole thing. The company paid $26.50 for oral appliance  therapy at the time, and the patient only paid $50 out of pocket.  09 /01/25   Page   of 6   16

SSC 2.0 - 407: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 1  [0:20:06]  Okay, number three, which insurance companies pay the least? Number four, who tends to  have the highest out of pocket? So one and two and three and four are kind of the con -  verse of each other. And then number five, is there anything you can do to change cover -  age? Can you talk to someone at a company level? That's a little unknown thing. A big  enough company, they will be technically self-insured, but they are having Blue Cross of  your state manage the plan. Well, if you can find a sympathetic ear at that company, or  maybe you treat someone and maybe you treat someone in the C-suite or who's connect -  ed to the C-suite officers, You can have some changes. If they understand how important  this sleep-related breathing disorder stuff is, I have seen companies change their policy  and where Blue Cross might do X in your state, this company that has Blue Cross, it'll be  different because that company actually is self-insured and they're having Blue Cross  manage the plan so they can do things the way they want to. It doesn't have to be follow -  ing Blue Cross's rules. So those are some things for you to know and understand and get  clear on.  [0:20:46]  You can have some changes. If they understand how important this sleep-related breath -  ing disorder stuff is, I have seen companies change their policy and where Blue Cross  might do X in your state, this company that has Blue Cross, it'll be different because that  company actually is self-insured and they're having Blue Cross manage the plan so they  can do things the way they want to. It doesn't have to be following Blue Cross's rules. So  those are some things for you to know and understand and get clear on.  Focus on your Target   [0:21:15]  Now, on focusing on your target, once you've got this overall view in your market and how  much is paid and things like that, then here's a couple other things. Number one, where  are the people who have the best coverage with the highest payment? In other words, you  have found out that, let's say that Aetna in your area pays the most. Well, where do people  with Aetna work? So a common example is state employees may have great coverage. If  you find out that the state employees have great coverage, is there a way, number two, for  you to provide a lecture at that company? Or let's say it's firefighters. I've done lunch and  learns or dinner and learns with firefighters, a bunch. I've done lunch and learns at com -  panies. For example, in North Carolina, I would go to Butterball and this is one of the com -  panies that had the $50 copay and they had this huge factory basically of workers and the  [0:22:21]  It was funny, one time I did this, well, it wasn't funny, but one time I went and I did a lunch  and learn and had like, I don't know, 20, 30 people there that were employees of this com -  pany. And they had like in office or in the building healthcare, probably because it was  dangerous. So they needed to have… someone there to administer first aid and take care  09 /01/25   Page   of 7   16

SSC 2.0 - 407: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 1  of problems anyway, but they had a nurse that was there all the time. That was her job.  And her job was also making people aware of things and making them more healthy. So  she would have me come and speak, usually once a year, sometimes even more than  that, to help people understand this. And I'll never forget, there was a guy sitting in the  back and this is around noon and he was basically asleep throughout my whole lecture.  And hopefully, if you've seen me at a big lecture, I try at least to be fairly entertaining and I  was given a pretty good show, I thought, and everyone else was awake, but this guy was  asleep.  [0:23:27]  And at the end, I mentioned to her because she noticed it too, I said, "Hey, that guy in the  back, what does he do here?" And she said, "Well, I'm not positive, but I know the area  that he has and guaranteed what he does is dangerous.” And it's like, "Oh, that's scary. So  this guy is falling asleep at work in a dangerous position. That sucks." So that was pretty  effective. So going to this company directly and again, as part of that at the end, I'd be  able to say, "Hey, and by the way, if you've already been diagnosed with sleep apnea and  can't tolerate CPAP, just come on up, let me know. If you're a candidate for treatment, it's  going to cost you like 50 bucks out of pocket." And people would be like, "Oh, right on.  That's awesome.”  [0:24:13]  Number three, do those people see certain doctors or are they seen at specific centers? If  you knew that, if you figured that out, then you could go and meet with those doctors. If  you know that they're in a certain town and that that's a specific primary care doctor that  most of these people see, you could go and maybe introduce yourself to that doctor or to  that center where people are seen. Number four, can you provide a lunch and learn or an  article or meet with that MD who sees those folks? Okay, is this making sense? So you  kind of want to know who's paying the most, then where are those people, how much do  they have to pay out of pocket, where do they work, where are they seen, what doctors  are working with them, things like that. This can be far more effective at growing your prof -  itable practice than just willy-nilly  [0:25:13]  Screening your patients and doing it that way. Now you're still gonna do that, I still want  you screening your patients going through this, but as you start getting more and more pa -  tients under your belt, you're building up this, we basically call it the insurance bible in your  practice so that you start recognizing these patterns. That okay, people with this insurance  is awesome and people with disinsurance is terrible. Well, once you find the awesome  ones, you want to seek these out. So the more of those you can have in your practice, the  better. There was a specific company a few years ago that was literally paying us three  times what the lowest insurance company was paying. So we didn't have to see three  people from the low insurance company to have the same profit as the best insurance  company, we actually had to see more like five or six because it's the profit margin, right?  So the people that were paying us very little, our profit margin was really, really small. And  09 /01/25   Page   of 8   16

SSC 2.0 - 407: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 1  it wasn't even though we were getting paid three to four times more by this other insurance  company, the profit was more like 10 times more.  [0:26:26]  Very, very different. Much easier to have a profitable practice when you're getting that  great reimbursement versus seeing a bajillion people with really, really low reimbursement.  You still want to help people, don't get me wrong, but you just see the profitability factor  there can be massively different. That's going to take you and your team doing a little  analysis, figuring stuff out, and then you as the doctor, this is your job by the way. So, and  if you're a team member watching these videos, you need to tell the doctor, this is their job.  It's the doctor's job to make the phone ring basically. It's the doctor's job to get out there  and talk at these different companies, to talk to the doctors, to build the referral base.  That's the doctor's job.  Pricing   [0:27:11]  All right, let's talk about pricing. So basic strategy of pricing is as your pricing goes down,  your sales go up, but of course there's limitations to that. So kind of the sweet spot is here  in the center, okay, where I've got the circle there, but our if our price was nothing, then  you would have a whole boatload of sales. So if you just made it like, "Hey, oral appliances  are free," then you're gonna sell a bunch. And then as this price goes up, there's gonna be  more and more people who say, "No, thank you." And then there's gonna be a sweet spot.  So you are looking for your price to be the cross section there of what is basically the  highest price I can have at the highest sales margin I can have.  [0:27:59]  When insurance is involved in things like that, then you have to take those other things  into account that I just talked about. But when insurance is not involved, then this is part of  it. Now, here's a little secret sauce that I teach our business elite people. And that is the  principle of something costing $100, $200, $300, $400, $500 expensive. Okay, here's what  I mean by that. If something costs $500 or less, it will be considered by the vast majority of  people not that expensive. If it is over $500, it'll be considered by the vast majority of peo -  ple as expensive. Now you may say, "Well, of course, Jamison, that depends on what  you're talking about. If it's a car, then there's different price points there." That's true. For  what we do as doctors, that's pretty much how it works. If you say a number under 500,  most people are going to be kind of like, "Okay, yeah, let's go forward with that." If it's over  500, then they're going to think about it.  [0:29:07]  Now, here's the other thing is if your price is, say, $2,000, the difference in case accep -  tance between $2,000 and $3,000 will be negligible because it's still a lot. $2,000 is a lot.  $3,000 is a lot. $4,000 is a lot. It's all a lot. So the same thought process that goes into  how do I pay two grand is going to come into how do I pay three grand? And there's price  09 /01/25   Page   of 9   16

SSC 2.0 - 407: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 1  elasticity with this. Most people don't come into your office having a clue of how much  what you do costs. And there's some things that you can do to help with that. But again,  most people are clueless. They have no idea what something's going to cost. And so when  you say a price, so most of you are going to be charging more than $500 for your sleep  and TMJ treatments. If you aren't, then you're never going to be profitable. So you're going  to need to do that. And as you are doing that  [0:30:08]  just remember that again, the number that you're looking for, you need to be comfortable  with it. That's a key point actually. In talking to my partners in our practices, Dr. Mangelson,  for example, at this point is the most experienced PRF in the jaw joint provider in the  world. I guarantee you. But he doesn't want to charge that much for it. And he gets uncom -  fortable thinking like, oh, wow, well, you know, That seems like too much. That's important.  It's important that you feel comfortable with your fees and Over time he may get more  comfortable as he has more and more and more and more Success and it just stacks and  stacks and stacks and stacks and stacks Then he may get to the point where he's like, you  know, actually this is a total bargain at this much money But right now he's got his fee  where he feels psychologically  [0:30:42]  That seems like too much. That's important. It's important that you feel comfortable with  your fees and Over time he may get more comfortable as he has more and more and more  and more Success and it just stacks and stacks and stacks and stacks and stacks Then he  may get to the point where he's like, you know, actually this is a total bargain at this much  money But right now he's got his fee where he feels psychologically he thinks and feels  that that's appropriate. With your pricing, do that, but just be aware, and my point of this  principle here of teaching you is that over 500 is expensive. So the difference between  $2,000, $3,000, $4,000, $5,000, believe it or not, is going to be about the same case ac -  ceptance because it's all just expensive.  [0:31:33]  And doing things like having payment plans and things like that to make it easier for the  patient will improve your case acceptance. But don't think that's like, okay, like I remember  coaching a dentist who was a member of Spencer Study Club and he was charging about  $6,200 at the time, which was quite on the high side for TMJ therapy. And when I say on  the high side, that’s compared to other people who were doing this. And he thought, and  he didn't ask me about this, he thought that if he changed his fee by $1,000, $5,200, he's  like, yeah, I think that's going to make a difference. Again, he didn't ask me about it. He  just did it. And it didn't change anything at all. And then after he told me this, I was like,  well, yeah, I would have told you that. There was going to be zero difference because  6,200 is a lot and 5,200 is a lot.  [0:32:25]  And that difference between that thousand bucks is not the difference between a person  saying yes or no. Okay, the person who says yes to 5,200 would have said yes to 6,200.  There's no one around that'd be like, well, 6,200, I can't do that, but 5,200, I could. Okay,  09 /01/25   Page   of 10   16

SSC 2.0 - 407: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 1  think about that. Think about your pricing. There's other things that you need to take into  consideration, but this is a big deal.  TMD Billing Options   [0:32:48]  Let's talk now about options for billing out TMD. Now, many of you, if not most of you,  won't have coverage for TMD at all in your state. And some of you will, and then some of  you, it will vary by insurance to insurance. And sometimes it'll even vary by policy within  insurance companies. Very, very confusing. Some insurance companies have coverage for  surgical TMJ care and not non-surgical care, not conservative care. It's ridiculous. Yes,  they'll cover physical therapy, but usually when the patient goes to physical therapy, it's  being billed out as headache or muscle pain or stuff like that.  [0:33:30]  Now, if you use that exact same code and you're a dentist, your NPI number identifies you  as a dentist, it's going to be TMJ, as far as the insurance company is concerned. When I  first started treating sleep apnea, as a matter of fact, almost all of the cases were denied  because it said, "We don't cover TMJ.” And then we would kind of go back to the insurance  company and say, yeah, this isn't for TMJ. So note the diagnosis code of sleep apnea,  note the treatment code of oral appliance for the sleep apnea. And then they'd be like, oh,  our bad. Like they had literally just gotten the habit of anything that came from our office  was denied because they didn't have coverage for TMJ. Okay. So let's assume that there  is some insurance coverage.  [0:34:12]  Then you've got some options here. This actually, I've got this slide as TMD billing options,  but this could apply to sleep apnea too. And I'll kind of go over the why or why I would not  do these various things. So number one is a boutique case fee, patient bills their own in -  surance. That is a good way to do it if you're not going to work with insurance at all. And  even on the patient bills their own insurance, you got to be a little careful with that. You  need to let the patient know that they probably will not get any coverage at all and that you  will not be playing the game of insurance companies by giving codes and all that sort of  stuff. So I know a doctor who does PRF. He's a former spine surgeon and now he only  treats people with regenerative medicine techniques. which is amazing. And that's Dr. Tal -  lick. You can go into the archives and see videos from him. He's both been a speaker at  Spencer Study Club live events, and then he's also been on our Zoom meeting. So check  that out. But Dr. Tallick charges a fee, and then the patient, if the patient wants to submit  this to their insurance, he will give them basically just a super bill that just says, here's how  much was charged.  [0:35:37]  And then if the patient's like, hey, my insurance says I need a code. He's like, okay, well  then tell them to tell you a code. And he's like, no, they're telling me that you need to say  09 /01/25   Page   of 11   16

SSC 2.0 - 407: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 1  the code. Well, I'm not going to. I don't have anything to do with your insurance. I don't  know what the code is. The insurance is going to have to tell you what the code is. And the  patient will then kind of go back to the insurance and keep this in mind. Okay, you and I,  we pay for insurance every month, but somehow insurance companies have miraculously  pulled the wool over our eyes and made it seem like we should just be unbelievably grate -  ful for them to ever pay a claim or do anything like that. Even the words they use with a  doctor being in network, a preferred provider, things like that. There's all of this stuff, the  explanation of benefits, it's your benefit. All of these things are  [0:36:35]  It's super smart how they set this up. No one seems to mind that the insurance company  has the nicest building in the whole town and that you're paying them a fortune and they  don't ever seem to want to give up any money. I'll have a little video to show you about that  when we talk about insurance. That is crazy to me. What Dr. Talley does is he just tells the  patient right up front, “Hey. If you want to submit this to your insurance, you're fine, go  ahead, but I don't play in that world at all. There's not going to be codes, there's not going  to be anything like that. There's just going to be that Dr. Tallick treated you and this is how  much it was charged. That is really the best way to do it. The next thing on here is you do  the case fee and then you bill the insurance "as a courtesy.”  [0:37:27]  I despise that model. Now, I wouldn't be surprised if you are like, "Well, that's what we do,  Jamison." Okay, I did too. So every model that can be done, we have done in our practice  over the years. This one's the worst, and here's why, because once again, the insurance  companies have done wonderful job at making patients think that they are the good guys.  Again, it blows my mind that we think this, but that's what we think. We think that they're  on our side, that their rules are in place to keep us from getting ripped off by these charla -  tan doctors or something. So when you submit the claim for the patient as a courtesy, and  then it's not paid all the way, 'cause here's what happens if you don't know this.  [0:38:16]  Patient calls up their insurance. "Hey, I've got a TMJ problem. I've been referred to Dr.  Spencer. Do I have coverage for TMJ?" And the insurance person says, "Yes, you do."  Okay, what that patient heard was, "It's free." Okay, you've got coverage means it's free.  So then they come into you and you're like, "Hey, yeah, glad that your insurance company  said you had coverage.” I wouldn't hold my breath if I were you 'cause I don't think they're  gonna cover that much. But you as the patient are like, yeah, well, they said they would,  so I'm cool. So your treatment's gonna be how much doctor? $3,000? Okay, no problem. I  think I've got that three grand I can give you 'cause I'm gonna get all that back from Blue  Cross, they told me on the phone. And they won't say that out loud to you 'cause if they  did, you could correct them and say, that ain't gonna happen, patient.  [0:39:03]  But then you say, oh, and by the way, we'll go ahead and submit that claim to your insur -  ance for you as a courtesy. And they're like, oh, even better. I don't have to deal with this.  I'm going to give you some money. I understand that. But, you know, I'm sure the insur -  09 /01/25   Page   of 12   16

SSC 2.0 - 407: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 1  ance is going to pay me back in a couple of weeks. No problem. We'll be good. Then pa -  tient pays you three grand. You submit the claim. The insurance goes through whatever  pays, pays, you know, the patient 600 bucks, right? And so then the patient's like feeling  ripped off because they will think several of the following things. One, why did my insur -  ance only pay $600 on a $3,000 bill? I must have been charged too much. That's one  thing they'll think of. Another thing they'll think of is you billed it wrong. This is very com -  mon. So they may call the insurance company and say, hey, I was told I have TMJ cover -  age.  [0:40:01]  "I was charged $3,000 by this dentist. "You only paid 600 bucks, what gives?" And the in -  surance company's like, "Oh, well, it appears that they used the wrong codes. "If they  would've used different codes, "then maybe it would've been covered higher." Patient then  calls your office manager to say, "You know, you guys are stupid. "You used the wrong  codes, "and therefore I got paid way less than I expected. "You know, I'm really upset  about this." This is a pretty much no-win situation. When you submit it as a courtesy, and  that patient is not paid 100% of what they paid, they're going to be mad at you. So if you  want to do that, which I strongly recommend you do not, you need to really prepare that  patient like, "Hey, we'll do this for you because we know you don't know how, but don't  hold your breath thinking that your insurance is going to pay. I don't care what they told  you on the phone. Our average patient with your Blue Cross insurance gets about 500  bucks back from their insurance, if that.”  [0:40:59]  And I would only even say that number if I knew that the average Blue Cross patient actu -  ally got $1,000 back. I would avoid saying a number anywhere even close to what they're  going to get back because if you did that, if you said, yeah, you know what? We've treated  hundreds of patients. Average Blue Cross patient we know gets $1,150 back. And then  that patient that you're dealing with has a different plan and they've got a $5,000 de -  ductible. So they pay all of it out of pocket. They're not going to get nothing. They're going  to be upset because they were planning to get something back from their insurance. So I  strongly encourage you not to do the we submit as a courtesy model. Lots of people do it. I  strongly encourage you not to do it.  [0:41:44]  Okay, next, modified case fee, large portion at initial and then per appointment. Again, this  works for TMD or sleep. And the idea here is that you say, "Hey, we are going to charge  you X and that covers everything we do for you for a certain amount of time." And the way  you can do that is say, "You're going to give us this much upfront and then we're going to  charge you per appointment up to this, or it doesn't even have to be an up to this. It could  be, we're gonna charge you $3,000 upfront and then it's $150 per appointment thereafter  or whatever. But that's kind of a modified case fee. A pure case fee would be where it's just  all at the top here, the top arrow there, a pure case fee is our fee is X and that's all inclu -  sive for a certain amount of time. Now, a quick note on that.  [0:42:42]  09 /01/25   Page   of 13   16

SSC 2.0 - 407: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 1  On a certain amount of time, make it longer than you think you want to. And here's why,  because if you say, "Well, I don't want to treat these people forever, so I'm going to have  my case fee be everything I can do for you for 90 days, three months." And that sounds  reasonable. And you're like, "You know what? Most of my patients get better faster than  that. Or, you know, let's say that we're going to do four months. We'll go a little bit longer.  And you're like, you know, even my TMD patients, my sleep patients, they're all done by  four months. My TMD patients, you know, most of them are all better at two and a half,  three months. So I give up four months. And then that way, if we have someone that's not  getting better as fast, then they're taken care of.  [0:43:26]  Okay, here's the problem with that. When you put a time limit on the treatment, on the  case fee, and that patient now gets anywhere close to that. So let's say we use four  months as our example. When that patient comes in for their two month follow-up, they're  going to be scared if they're not 100% better, 'cause they're gonna be thinking, "Oh crud,  I'm halfway through this four months, I'm not 100% better. What if I don't get 100% better?  I can't really afford to be charged more after four months and they told me they're going to  charge me more after four months. Oh my goodness, I'm really nervous about this and  they will cause themselves to have a problem. So it is better, and again, this is all from  personal experience, it's better to have a longer time limit here.  [0:44:15]  So if you typically get your patients all better in three to four months, then I would have  your case fee cover for six months. The vast majority of patients are not wanting to come  into your office just for kicks and giggles because they paid for six months. That almost  never happens. Just like with orthodontics, if you had you personally had orthodontics or  your kid had orthodontics and the orthodontist is like, "Hey, this is gonna cover everything  we need to do for you.” Average treatment time is 24 months and you know we're not  nickel and diming you here, this is all covered for everything we do for you for that 24  months, that's our average treatment time. And at 18 months, they're like, "Hey, you know,  Johnny's done, we're done. Taking the braces off, good to go." No one ever in the history  of ever has said, "Hey, you know what, I paid for 24 months of braces, I want those braces  on that kid for another six months." No one's ever said that. Your patients won't say that  here either, they want an outcome.  [0:45:05]  They're not paying for splint therapy. They're not paying for an oral appliance for their  sleep apnea. They're paying for pain relief, improved function. They're paying for getting in  the same bed with their spouse that they haven't been in the same bed with for five years.  They are paying for not falling asleep at the wheel. They're paying for not losing their job  because they're falling asleep at their desk. It's the outcome that they're paying for. Okay.  And then lastly, billed by procedure. per appointment and this is typical for offices that are  kind of a pure insurance model and they're just billing out every procedure they can as the  patient comes in. Now this is not uncommon when people have an insurance type model  09 /01/25   Page   of 14   16

SSC 2.0 - 407: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 1  and it's not great either and here's why. Again, medical doctors get away with this stuff be -  cause they never talk about money and you never have a clue what was billed out.  [0:45:58]  For us, we don't tend to work that way. We tend to talk about money with people. We tend  to show them right then what was billed out. And so let's say that you're going to do, you  decide to do this model and you're charging out for adjustments to the appliance. And  those are typically billed out in 15-minute increments. And so you have the patient come in  and one appointment they required quite a bit of adjustment and your team member is with  them for over 30 minutes. So they circle that they did two units of adjustment and the pa -  tient's billed out $89, let's say. For that, they see that that's billed out. And then the next  time they come in  [0:46:41]  Really nothing is done to their appliance, but still an office visit was charged, but the ad -  justment wasn't, the patient's going to be confused when that's lower. And then let's say  the next time they come in, something happened or maybe they had a crown placed or  something and it was longer and now it's more expensive. So every time they come in,  they don't know how much it's going to be. And if they come in and nothing's done, there's  still a charge because that's still charged for that office visit. They will feel nickel and  dimed. So would you in that situation. So I don't like that model. You will tend to have peo -  ple with that model, they won't come in because they'll say, "Well, I'm doing fine. I don't  need to come in. You're going to charge me if I come in." And if you're charging the insur -  ance and just getting paid from the insurance,  [0:47:29]  That might be okay, but if you're expecting that patient to pay and then get reimbursed by  the insurance or something like that, just be prepared that a lot of patients won't come in  because they're like, I'm doing fine. I have no reason to come in. You're going to charge  me for that, so I'm not coming in. Okay, so those are some of the things to think about that  you may not have thought about. And I'll bet you that if you've been doing any of this for a  while, I just hit one of the things that you're doing on this slide here, and you've probably  already experienced some of the negatives of that. So be smart when you're setting up  how you're going to build.  [0:48:03]  The best in my opinion for TMD for sure is a case fee that's all inclusive for long enough  where the vast majority of your patients are going to be better in that time. And speaking of  that, nowadays you can do something that will make it so dang near every patient's going  to be better quickly and that is So if you are doing PRF for TMJ problems, either in the  joint, muscles, tendons, whatever, and then you're doing splint therapy as the crutches,  and remember us talking about that in the advanced TMD, and I talked about it with the  different injections in level three, go back and watch that if you don't remember that, or if  you came here first to make sure you're profitable, if you're like, I'm gonna check out that  profitability lecture first thing before I go through all the other stuff. That's okay, but check  that out because  09 /01/25   Page   of 15   16

SSC 2.0 - 407: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 1  [0:48:53]  Really what I recommend you do is you have a case fee for regenerative TMD treatment.  That's what you're charging for. You're charging for the regenerative treatment and the  splints you could even literally just throw them in, not charge anything at all. That'll blow  their mind because everyone else in town charges for the splints. The TMD dude across  town charges $1,500 a splint. That's what they say. They literally say that to the patient.  We've said that to patients for years. But what if your model was, oh, you know, yeah, this  is just like crutches. We charge the same as we would charge if we were giving you a hel -  met to protect your teeth from, you know, the helmet analogy there is the patient's banging  their head against the wall, you give them a helmet.  [0:49:40]  If you're giving them a pair of crutches, you could say, "Hey, this is kind of similar to us giv -  ing a night guard to a patient who's grinding their teeth." And the fee's the same. It's 500  bucks for that. It's 600 bucks for that. Well, if they've ever gotten a night guard from their  dentist, they know that's what the fee is. And you're not charging them any more than what  their dentist charges. That's a nice model. Okay? So I would strongly encourage you to do  that where you have a case fee that includes the PRF treatments, includes the crutches  and then getting them back for follow-up and stuff like that. If you did that for this is all in -  clusive for six months, that would allow you to do three different PRF injections spaced  three to four weeks apart and they are gonna be almost assuredly awesome at that point,  give you time to wean them off of the crutch during the day and then they just go on wear -  ing that night guard forever as we talk about and that's gonna be a successful case in  dang near every case.  [outro music]  09 /01/25   Page   of 16   16

