SSC 2.0 - 408: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 2  SSC 2.0   Level 4  408: Practical Principles of Pro fi tability for  Sleep & TMD Part 2  [intro music]  Lower your Overhead   [0:00:12]  Now let's talk a little bit about lowering your overhead. There is increased revenues, of  course, is a great way to be profitable, but then also lowering the expenses that are going  out the door, that's also important. Now we probably don't wanna be like this guy. That's  extracting teeth and fitting dentures on the street in the plaza there. That overhead is a lit -  tle lower than you're gonna want. He's got a nice white jacket there and stuff, and it looks  like he's got a way to sterilize his instruments or at least clean them off a little bit.  A Cone Beam CT?   [0:00:53]  But seriously, do you need a Cone beam CT? Now in our practice, yeah, we do. Do you?  Not necessarily. Just tonight, as a matter of fact, we were having one of our business elite  Zoom meetings and one of the doctors presented on some things that she's doing that's  helping her case acceptance and whatnot. And she mentioned that she doesn't have a  cone beam CT and that she refers her patients with TMJ problems to get an MRI.  [0:01:22]  So they, she does an initial evaluation to make sure they're in the right place and that she  can help them. And then she sends them for an MRI. They get the MRI, come back with  the MRI, and then she reviews it with them. And I was like, well, that's great because the  patient's getting an awesome film. You get to see the soft tissue. You get to see the bone  as well. There's a radiologist that reads it and puts it in the report. You're then able to dis -  cuss that with the patient. And when she does this, a very, very high percentage of patients  go into treatment with her. She is leveraging the use of the $2 million MRI that the hospital  has or that the local MRI center has instead of her having a $80,000 cone beam CT that  won't show the soft tissue.  [0:02:09]  So do you absolutely need a cone beam CT? No, you don't. You could do this model. You  could even use someone else's cone beam CT and still have it read by a radiologist, go  over the report, stuff like that. So you don't necessarily need this yourself. Now, once you  get to a certain level, is it nice to have a cone beam CT? Absolutely. And that will be worth  09 /01/25   Page   of 1   14

SSC 2.0 - 408: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 2  it to you. But once you're just getting started, you don't necessarily need to jump out and  run out and buy an $80,000 machine.  A Four Home Sleep Test?   [0:02:36]  Do you need four home sleep testing units? No, you don't. So back in the day, our office  had four home sleep testing units and we're sending them out all the time and stuff. Now  we have no home sleep testing units. And we refer our patients in back to the sleep doctor.  Sleep doctor decides to do a follow-up sleep study.  [0:02:57]  Now, you've heard me talk before, probably, about you doing some home sleep testing as  a beginner to make sure that you are in the ballpark, that your treatment is being effective.  And that's a reasonable thing to do. When you're going to do that, get the same HST unit  that your local sleep doctors have. However, do you have to have that? You know, a home  sleep test unit is going to be anywhere from, you know, a thousand bucks or you can have  the disposable ones that are a hundred bucks a pop or maybe as high as five thousand  dollars for some of these units that you're going to use over and over again and then it's  going to cost you a certain amount every time you use it. Usually when we're doing these  HSTs, we're either not charging anything at all or we're charging a relatively nominal  amount to the patient. With our sleep doctors doing home sleep testing  [0:03:49]  This has become kind of even a worse spot for us to be as dentists because they probably  paid little or nothing for their home sleep test in the first place. So if you want to do a titra -  tion study and you're going to charge them say 50 bucks or 150 bucks, well they're going  to compare that to what they paid their sleep doctor which was no bucks and they might  be a little bit miffed at that, that they're having to do that. Now you can put it into your fee,  you could just kind of charge more and then make that complimentary, it's included in your  fee but once again, do you really need it? Is that important? Is it important to the sleep  doctor that you do this or does the sleep doctor have enough experience that they're pretty  pro oral appliance therapy. They know that you're gonna do your best and they know that  they might do a follow-up and there might need to be a little bit of tweaking.   Bottom line,  you probably don't need to have four home sleep testing units, maybe one, but you proba -  bly don't need four and maybe you don't need any at all. You can use something like  SnoreLab and measure their snoring objectively and that could be what you do.  A Fancy Software?   [0:05:03]  Do you need fancy software? Usually, no. If you are a relative beginner here, you're just  going to use your dental software. You don't need to go out and buy some dental sleep  09 /01/25   Page   of 2   14

SSC 2.0 - 408: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 2  medicine software. Now, once you get to a certain point, yeah, then you might want to get  an electronic medical record like a real medical doctor uses. All of us that do sleep and  TMD only, we have electronic medical records. We don't have dental software anymore.  [0:05:34]  I've actually never had dental software. I've only had medical software in my practice. If  you are using something like Dentrix or Ecosoft or whatever now, you can do quite a bit  with dental sleep medicine and TMD within that software. Once you get 20 plus patients a  month, then you might start thinking about, well, maybe I should get something that's more  specific medical because it will save you and your team time. At first though, you don't re -  ally need that.  All The Other Stuff?   [0:06:01]  All the other stuff you don't use. So if you got a Ferringometer, you can probably just sell  that on eBay. You don't really need it. If you got... I've had it all, by the way. I've bought all  the stuff over the years and I did learn from using some of it and then I ultimately sold it to  somebody else at pennies on the dollar.  [0:06:21]  But really at this point, as you go through level two, as you go through level three, you'll  see that I'm kind of the low BS guy, which means low buying stuff. So you don't really need  to buy a lot of stuff to do TMD and dental sleep medicine at the highest level. Keep your  overhead low. Don't buy a bunch of stuff. The thing that you want to pay well for is your  team actually. You want to have that margin there so you can pay your team well, so that  you reduce turnover. You're not having to retrain people all the time. That's going to be  your biggest expense is training team members. So you want to keep them  [0:07:00]  Keep them happy, keep them paid well. That's where you want to spend a little bit more on  your overhead, on all of these toys and stuff that you might see at a meeting. You usually  don't need those. Those are not going to actually improve what you do. And by the way, if  you work with medical insurance, they're not going to pay you more anyway. They don't  care that you just bought some really expensive laser that that cost you $80,000 and now  you're using that for that patient, they don't care. They're still going to pay you what they  pay you and that's it. So be really, really careful with your overhead on things like that.  Only buy things that make sense and that you can really track on  [0:07:40]  And also, by the way, I would never buy anything at all without checking in with Spencer  Study Club members first because they've already been down that road, they've already  done what you're about to do, and they will tell you the best ones to buy. They will tell you  if it was worth it or not. And if there's enough people that are doing this, we almost always  get a Spencer Study Club member discount. And that can save you sometimes thousands  09 /01/25   Page   of 3   14

SSC 2.0 - 408: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 2  of dollars if it's a really high ticket item and hundreds of dollars or dozens of dollars if it's a  lower ticket item.  A Billing Company?   [0:08:11]  Do you need a billing company? Usually, no. If you are doing a few a month and the billing  company just charges you per piece, well then maybe yeah, and that can be worth it and  your staff can learn from the billing company as they're getting going. That is reasonable.  However, if the billing company is charging you a monthly fee and they're charging you a  software fee and all sorts of stuff like that, it's possible that you might need to treat one or  two people just to pay those fees. And by the way, when a billing company charges you 8  or 10%, they are taking a huge part of your profit. So if you know what your overhead is,  let's say that your overhead is on the low-ish side, that your overall overhead in your office  is about, let's say 60%. And let's say that the billing company is going to charge you 10%,  but they don't charge you 10% of profit, they charge you 10% of the income. So if you got  [0:09:12]  $2,000 let's say for an appliance, they're going to charge you 10% of that, 200 bucks.  Okay. And then you've got all of your overhead. Let's say that your overhead was that  60%. See if I can do the math on that in my head really quick here. So, um, that'd be  $1,200. So $1,200 is your overhead, your profit is $800, but they took $200 of that $800,  which if my math is correct, that is they took 25%. of your profit, okay? And that was a pret -  ty decent scenario that I gave there where you're getting paid a reasonable amount and  your overhead is reasonably low. If your overhead is higher, which it could be with dental  sleeve medicine because you want to use a $750 oral appliance. If you're using a really  expensive appliance, now your profit is lower billing company is still charging you that  same 10%, you might be giving as high as 50% or even more of your profit to the billing  company. Is it worth it? Probably not.  Lab Costs   [0:10:16]  And speaking of lab costs, consider working with one main lab in order to possibly get a  bulk discount once you get up to a certain point. So if you like a few different appliances,  you can work with a lab that is making those appliances, or you can kind of narrow it down  to a couple appliances. And most labs, once you get to say 10 a month, things like that,  they'll work with you and they want to keep your business and they will give you a dis -  count. And that can make a big difference. I know some people that are paying $200 less  per appliance than someone else for the same exact appliance because of the volume that  they do with that laboratory. Now, on the other hand, or not on the other hand, but in addi -  09 /01/25   Page   of 4   14

SSC 2.0 - 408: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 2  tion to that, or as as a way that you don't even need to have a lab bill, you could bring the  lab in house.  [0:11:15]  And this is a little easier said than done, 'cause nowadays there are lots of appliances that  have to be PDAC approved if you're in the United States. And that basically requires you  to work with a lab because the lab is the one that gets that PDAC approval. But if you were  going to be a pure boutique and still wanted to keep your costs down so that your profit  was excellent, you could make your appliances in-house. As of the recording of this,  [0:11:44]  There are some of our Spencer Study Club members who are printing appliances. We  were just talking about that in our business elite meeting tonight. And this one doctor who  is printing in-house is really thrilled and has had a great experience so far. The patients are  finding the appliance to be very, very comfortable and effective. And the nice thing is the  model that that company is using that sells the printer and the materials and the design  and all that stuff is the dentist pays one time for the design fee. And then after that, if you  want to print more of the appliances, you don't pay an additional design fee. So the first  appliance, let's say, costs 100 bucks. And then the second appliance only costs for the  cost of the printing, which might be 20 dollars.  [0:12:33]  That's pretty exciting. So look for that to be more and more. I think the days of dentists  paying five to $800 for an oral appliance are going away, that we will be printing these in  house, but you can, make old school appliances too, like the EMA that's made using  Thermoform you can make in-house. You can buy kits directly from Glidewell as of the  time that I'm recording this. You can buy the kits and make that FDA approved appliance  right in-house. I think the kits are about 70 bucks maybe. So pretty inexpensive. You could  have the appliance for certainly under 120 bucks with your staff time and everything that  goes into making that.  [0:13:18]  There's some other appliances that you can make in-house. We have made thousands  upon thousands of appliances in-house. We make EMA appliances, have for years. We  also make dorsal fin appliances using the salt and pepper technique like that's been done  for years and years. You can do this. And there's some other advantages to this, having  your own lab. There's some certain tax advantages that you can use. The biggest advan -  tage though is that you can get the patient treated like right now. Like you can take your  scans or do whatever you take impressions and pour stone if you still do that. You can  rapidly go from initial impressions or scans to  [0:14:02]  printed or thermoformed appliance within a few hours. And this is pretty awesome. But just  keep that in mind. And this is something that, you know, the laboratories, they don't love  me talking about this stuff, right? Because they think that, you know, they deserve to  charge that $750, $800. We know how much it costs to make these things and it's  nowhere close to that. And some of these companies are publicly traded. You can read  09 /01/25   Page   of 5   14

SSC 2.0 - 408: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 2  right in there, right in their stuff online for them being listed on the NASDAQ or stuff like  that, you can read what they're doing and it will show you their profit margins and it will  show you what they're telling investors. And basically it's like, yeah, look at these dumb  dentists paying us three times, four times, five times what it costs us to do this and look at  our profit margin here. You can have this in-house. Remember, the patient isn't paying you  for the piece of plastic. No patient is impressed that you paid $800 for a nylon appliance  from somebody. The patient is impressed that you got rid of their snoring or that wearing  this oral appliance that you gave them got rid of their snoring. They're impressed that they  lost weight as they were treating their sleep apnea. They're impressed that they aren't fall -  ing asleep in the afternoons anymore at work.  [0:15:23]  That's what they're buying. They're not buying a piece of plastic. So with that in mind, con -  sider lowering your lab costs because again, in my experience, other than perhaps the  speed of delivery, there's not that big a difference between a couple hundred dollar appli -  ance and a twice as much appliance. And by the way, as your staff get better, they get bet -  ter at fitting these things. So my staff are exceptionally good at fitting appliances. They  could probably take one appliance that was made for someone else and make it fit some -  one else. They are so good. Now we don't want them doing that right. We want them just  kind of putting the appliance in and not really needing to touch it. That would be amazing.  And if they do good enough records and you are working with a good lab, that will be more  common for you. However, if you have good staff.  [0:16:20]  The laboratory, whatever that staff member gets, they're going to be able to fit it and fit it  quickly and effectively and comfortably for the patient. Strongly consider an in-house lab.  It's not for everybody. You need to have the space, that's for sure. But if you can pull this  off, having an in-house lab will save you literally hundreds of thousands of dollars over the  years.  Time is Money   [0:16:44]  Time is money and using your team is critical for you to have a profitable practice. And so  here's some ideas of things that you might be able to use team members for. Screening  discussions, handling referrals, and follow-up. So this nowadays, a lot of these things are  done via telemedicine so that screening and the follow-up can be done via telemedicine.  And in some cases, the doctor will do that. And in some cases, you can have an employee  doing those things that knows the patient, knows what they're talking about, knows how to  communicate with the patient. Handling referrals and communicating with the referring  doctor's office is almost always done by staff members to other staff members.  [0:17:34]  09 /01/25   Page   of 6   14

SSC 2.0 - 408: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 2  Initial discussion at exam, and then give you the bullet. So this is how we've run our prac -  tice forever and that is that the assistant comes in with the patient, goes through all their  paperwork, talks to them, may talk to that patient for 15-20 minutes, then the doctor comes  in and sits down and says, "Hey Janice, you and Jim have been talking for about 20 min -  utes here.  [0:17:59]  What's going on?" And then Janice says, "Well, Jim," and then just kind of goes in and  gives you the bullet. Tells you very quickly, concisely what's going on, and then you say,  "Oh, okay, awesome. Jim, did Janice kind of get everything there that you talked about?"  And typically Jim says, "Oh my gosh, that was amazing. Yep, Janice hit it there. You know,  one thing I forgot was," and then they may say something. So rather than you spending 20  minutes going over that, you came in and got all of that information in one minute, and  then you're able to go into your examination that only you can do.  Records   [0:18:34]  Records, bite registrations, impressions, scans, all that kind of stuff definitely can be done  by the staff. Now, you need to know what you're doing so that you can train the staff, but  once you know what you're doing and have trained the staff, then it's great. One of the  best things about scanning, and almost everybody nowadays is scanning, quick note on  that, by the way, don't let the company’s sucker you into believing that scanning is superior  to a good impression. It's not.  [0:19:06]  Okay, I've had interviews or I've interviewed Gordon Christian about this. I was actually  just literally this past weekend with Gordon Christiansen. I do a course for him at his Prac -  tical Clinical Courses Center and we were talking about this and he said that yeah, for a  single crown, for a bridge, scanning is fine, but full arch, it's not even close to a well done  alginate impression. Okay, that is Gordon Christian as of 2025. It's not even close. Now,  having said that, and I brought this up when Gordon said that this weekend, I said, now,  however, Gordon, if one of these dentists here takes a superior impression and sends it to  the laboratory, what's the laboratory going to do? And he said, well, they're going to scan  it.  [0:19:57]  Now, the lab scanners are better than the intraoral scanners, but even the lab scanners  are not quite as good as a well-done impression. So just keep that in mind. Go ahead and  get your scanner for sure. We would not even want to practice anymore without scanners.  They are that awesome. But here's the best part about a scanner. It's not the accuracy or  the precision of it. That's baloney. What is the best part about a scanner is that your staff  member can take a partial scan and then you can come in and finish it. So that beats the  heck out of an impression, as you remember, that if the impression is not perfect, what do  09 /01/25   Page   of 7   14

SSC 2.0 - 408: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 2  you do? Well, you start all over again. And if the assistant fails two or three times, then you  as the dentist would have to do it. It's awful, right?  [0:20:48]  Well, with a scan, you can have that assistant do the best job that they can. You come in  and if they're like, yeah, I'm having a hard time getting that second molar, getting the disc  of the second molar there, then you can go in and maybe make the patient a little uncom -  fortable by doing the uncomfortable part. And your staff member, you can say, "Yeah, your  job, get it to 90% for me. I'll finish that last 10%." And then you come in, you look at it and  you're like, "Oh my gosh, you know, Daisy did such a great job with this scan. I'm going to  go in, I'm going to kind of do that kind of the ouchy part here. I saved that for me so that  you still like Daisy there. I'm going to go in and just grab a couple areas here that are a lit -  tle uncomfortable. It'll be quick."  [0:21:27]  And then you can go in, get those distals that were a little bit harder for your assistant to  get and have a perfect scan, as perfect as the scan's gonna be, you can do that in stages.  That's cool. So I strongly encourage you, if you don't have a scanner, you know, get with  the times and get a scanner for crying out loud. If just for that reason, that your staff will be  more comfortable, they can get a partial scan and then you can finish the scan. Your staff  members though should be doing all of this. They should be doing the by registrations. As  a beginner, you come in and you check the by registration and make sure it all looks good.  Eventually, you will have so much trust in your staff that you won't need to do that any -  more. But at first, I would encourage you to check the by registrations, make sure the per -  son didn’t hold their jaw weird or something like that.  Fitting of the Appliances   [0:22:18]  Fitting of the appliances in our practices, the staff do all of the fitting of appliances and on  the follow-up adjustment of appliances, our staff do that too. As a matter of fact, you will  never see a dentist in our practices adjusting an appliance unless it's in the laboratory  where the patient can't see. So we pretty much adjust all of our appliances in the lab any -  way, but a dentist would never in our practices let the patient know that it's like, oh, you  know, let me take care of that. Because if you do that, now the patient has lost faith in the  assistant. Don't do that. Again, how do I know? Because I've done that. If the dentist goes  in and does something, it's like, okay, hey, I adjusted your appliance. How's that feel now?  And the patient's like, oh my gosh, that's so much better. Yeah, you're the best doctor.  When they come in next time, I'm like, I don't want to see Daisy. I need to see Dr. Spencer.  Dr. Spencer is the only one that can adjust my appliance. You know, he's the only one  good enough.  [0:23:22]  09 /01/25   Page   of 8   14

SSC 2.0 - 408: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 2  Don't do that. So we will, if we do touch it, then we would maybe come back in the room.  Hey, you know, Daisy just adjusted the appliance. Let's check on that. Let me check. Oh,  is that better now? Okay, good. Good job, Daisy. And I would make that connection with  our assistant once again, because that's what I want. This is the only way that you're able  to treat a lot of people is if the patients have confidence.  [0:23:48]  In your staff and this is why our practice sets it up this way from the get-go is that the pa -  tient their initial connection is with a staff member and then that staff member is given the  bullet to the dentist okay but that initial is there and then when they get their records it's  there and maybe the dentist comes in just to check on it and then they come in and get the  oral appliance and that's with the assistant and they're coming in for follow-up and that's  with the assistant the doctor's just coming in to say how you doing everything okay all right  here's the next thing we're going to do. The dentist is directing the care. They're not provid -  ing the intricacies of the care. Again, think orthodontist. That's typically how that would  work.  Communication with Patients   and Recall   [0:24:26]  Communication with patients in between appointments, super important for staff to be do -  ing this. That is done via text, it's being done via telemedicine if necessary. All this stuff can  be done by your staff and then if it needs to come up to your level for decision making,  that's great, but the staff can do that follow-up. And then lastly, recall. As I've mentioned  before, we have so many patients we're seeing in our practice, we literally have an em -  ployee that their entire job is getting patients back on recall. Reaching out to them, letting  them know we need to get them in, figuring out if their insurance is ready to pay for a new  appliance, which they'll do every few years. That is one person's job in our office exclu -  sively. That's all she does. So this can all be done by your team.  [0:25:17]  Freeing up your time as the doctor for getting out there and getting more referrals and  things like that. But really it just frees up your time to do the thinking part and the discus -  sion part with the patients, the case presentations. That's what you should be doing as a  doctor. As a beginner though, learn all these roles so that you know how to do this and  eventually you're going to teach people how to do it to your specifications.  A Little More About Time is Money   [0:25:43]  So a little bit more on the idea of time is money. If you are trying to incorporate dental  sleep medicine and TMD into your existing restorative practice, One of the areas where  people fall down is they will oftentimes try to put everything in their normal flow and as you  09 /01/25   Page   of 9   14

SSC 2.0 - 408: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 2  will soon figure out if you haven't figured this out already, sleep and TMD are significantly  different than a typical restorative work and the time that you're spending with the patient  and where that may go and how long you need to take sometimes is difficult to know. So  what I often encourage people who are starting out in this area, what I encourage you to  do, if that is you, is perhaps you have a specific block of time that you're going to use for  dental sleep and TMD.  [0:26:47]  Maybe Thursday afternoons, that's going to be your sleep and TMD time. And then if  Thursday afternoon comes and you don't have patients in that period, then you can use  that time to study. You can make some phone calls. You can go out and try to connect with  a medical doctor. You could use that for marketing purposes, really. That is probably the  best way to do it. Now, having said that, there may be times where patients can't come in  on that Thursday afternoon that you've set aside for focused work in that area. As that  happens, you need to start having.  Quick, Focus Exam   [0:27:22]  Protocols in place of how am I going to see these patients and do it in a smart and prof -  itable manner. So here are a couple suggestions. First of all, your initial contact with that  patient, your initial examination with that patient should be pretty quick. So for sleep, a  common mistake I see people make is they go into way too much stuff with that sleep pa -  tient who's already been diagnosed. So if you have a patient that, let's say you're getting  started and you've sent out communication to your patient base that says, hey, if you can't  tolerate CPAP, we can help you.  [0:28:06]  And I'll talk about some of this in the marketing section as well. You can't tolerate CPAP,  we can help. Well, that person's already been diagnosed. So you don't need to really get  into depth on, well, what's their neck circumference and what's their BMI and what's their  Malampatti and what's their Epworth even, things like this, because they've already been  diagnosed. We already know they have sleep apnea. We're not trying to decide if they  have sleep apnea or not. We know they have sleep apnea. So all you need to decide is,  are they a candidate for an oral appliance or not? That's really it. And then you have that  communication with the doctor to prescribe oral appliance therapy if they are a candidate.  So this can be much quicker than perhaps you're doing now.  What About TMD?   [0:28:52]  What about TMD? With TMD, this is a little more complicated. And what I recommend is  that you do a quick initial exam and then you bring them back for more. Now, a very logical  09 /01/25   Page   of 10   14

SSC 2.0 - 408: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 2  and appropriate approach for this is that you decide that you need records. And a cone  beam CT, for example, would be very common for us to want to get for a patient with a  temporal medullary disorder, looking for arthritic changes, things like that. Or as I said a  couple of slides ago.  [0:29:26]  If you don't have a cone beam CT, maybe you send that patient for an MRI and you're go -  ing to get a great image there and you're going to see the soft tissue, you're going to see  the hard tissue as well, you're going to see if there's arthritic changes, but you're also go -  ing to see if there's a distance placement. You could send the patient for that imaging and  then bring them back at a time that you can plan for. And I would encourage you on these  first patients that you're seeing that you don't have any distractions. If you have two or  three hygienists that coming to get you for hygiene checks or even one hygienist, that  could be disruptive and it breaks your flow and it breaks your connection with the patient.  And you really don't want that to happen.  [0:30:06]  Those of us that this is all we do for a living, of course, When we are in with a new patient  and we're doing a consultation, we're doing an examination, we're not being interrupted by  our team for something else. They know not to do that. They know if they have a question  or if the patient has a question and the patient doesn't want to wait for the doctor to be  available, then they have that patient go and the doctor will call the patient or something  like that. In your practice, it's not uncommon for restorative dentists to have these ques -  tions constant kind of, well not constant, but these typical interruptions of the hygiene de -  partment doing their job and you needing to go and do your examination, plan accordingly  for that so it doesn't get frustrating for you. But back to the TMD patient, I think it's great to  have like an initial examination. And if you go back in level three, we talk about this, an ini -  tial examination where it's like, hey, I can help you. Maybe you do a little spray and stretch.  Maybe you show them how you can make that click go away.  [0:31:06]  They are like, "Okay, wow, that's cool." And then you say, "Hey, let's get the cone beam CT  here at our office. Let's refer you for the MRI over there. And then we're going to get you  back in. We're going to spend about an hour together. We're going to go over those im -  ages. I'm going to do a thorough examination. I'm very confident we can help you. We're  just going to set up that treatment plan." That's the best way to do that.  Fitting Appointments   [0:31:28]  On fitting appointments for TMD and sleep, this is team driven. You want to get your team  members good at fitting appliances and very confident with that and what to do if adapta -  tions need to be made, if changes need to be made, if alterations need to be made to the  appliance. This is a great thing about sleep and TMD that can help your profitability is that  09 /01/25   Page   of 11   14

SSC 2.0 - 408: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 2  you as a restorative dentist can be doing your restorative dentistry in one room and at the  same time you have one or two assistants or perhaps more depending on your capacity  that are fitting appliances, doing follow-up, which is the next thing here.  Follow up   [0:32:09]  On the follow-up, a common mistake I also have seen over the years is dentists getting  people back too quick. And maybe this is because they were taught that by whoever  taught them. But remember that a lot of the people that are teaching this out there don't  necessarily do it at a high level. Sometimes it's good to ask people these questions and to  do it in a nice way. But like I was teaching a course recently and there was, I asked, you  know, who's done some of this and one person raised their hand and it was in Canada.  [0:32:41]  And so I kind of wanted some intel there on what their current system is in that province  specifically, and kind of what some of the laws are and things. And I'd done my due dili -  gence in advance. I'd actually called some friends from Ontario, Canada, and I knew what  was being done. But then after a while, this guy did take my lead there and he chimed in  on some stuff and gave some opinion. And then after a little bit, I had to actually get really  clear. And I said, hey, don't mean this question to be offensive in any way, but approxi -  mately how many people do you treat, say, a year? And he goes, oh, maybe 10 to 15 a  year. And I was like, okay, good. Awesome. Good for you. That's great.  [0:33:29]  Now, that's hardly any, right? So he's treating one a month on average. and there, why I  wanted him to kind of say that out loud was so that the people in the room there weren't  thinking that this guy was some sort of expert that they should like hang on every word that  he says. You need to do that same thing too. And again, I don't think it's very nice that if  somebody was lecturing on this and they're telling you all this stuff and, oh yeah, get your  patient back in a week and then do a two week check and stuff like that.  I don't think it's nice for you to raise your hand and go.  [0:34:03]  Curious, how many people are you seeing a month? Like how many, how many new pa -  tients you starting a month? I'd put them on the spot that might make them pretty uncom -  fortable. But on the other hand, to go up at the break or at the end of the lecture and just  say, Hey, uh, really appreciated everything you said there. I'm curious about how many on  average people are you seeing a month? Cause I kind of need to take that into perspec -  tive to understand how I build that flow that you were talking about. And then they'll, then  they'll typically tell you if you, if you, uh,  [0:34:31]  Put the question in that context, they're going to tell you. And then if they say, oh yeah, you  know, we're seeing five or 10 people a month. Okay. You can kind of take that into per -  09 /01/25   Page   of 12   14

SSC 2.0 - 408: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 2  spective where if they say, well, we're seeing 50 people a month, a hundred people a  month. All right. That's a very different practice. And that may be something you're going  towards. That may be something you're not going towards. Back to the follow-up visits  though.  First Follow-up in Three to Four Weeks   [0:34:51]  What I encourage you to do, and this is in level three, is to talk to the patient about getting  them back for their first follow-up in three to four weeks letting them know that if they have  any comfort issues or whatnot, you want them to call you so that you can get them in  quicker. And even that three or four weeks now, we are often doing a telemedicine in ad -  vance of that and then seeing if they actually need to come in physically. If they don't need  to, if they're not having any problems. Now, trust me, over the years, we have brought in  tons of people who come in and it's like, "Hey, any problems with the appliance?" "No."  "How are you feeling?" "Awesome." "How are you progressing?" “Great." okay, goodbye.  And that was it. And particularly with sleep. So with TMD, sometimes there are some little  nuance adjustments that you want to make to their appliance. So maybe you do want to  see them in person because they're not going to be dialed in enough to know that their  bite's slightly off on one side or something like that. With sleep, on the other hand, it's pret -  ty straightforward.  [0:35:53]  How's the snoring? How are you feeling? Any comfort issues? If the snoring’s good and  they're feeling good and there's no comfort issues, they don't necessarily need to come in,  you or your team by your direction could tell them, well, let's go ahead and go to this band.  Let's do this. Let's do whatever adjustment you're going to make. They don't need to come  in. This is using telemedicine for this too. So I have some follow-up by phone, but we are  now using telemedicine or, well, telemedicine is phone, I guess. But nowadays when we  say telemedicine, we think computer often. And you can do this by phone. You can do this  on the computer.  [0:36:36]  Currently the program that we use is Doxy, D-O-X-Y dot M-E, Doxy dot M-E. I believe they  still have a discount for Spencer Study Club members. It's very affordable in the first place.  And that really has revolutionized our practice. This all started with the pandemic and  when it was difficult slash impossible to see people in person. And we started doing this.  And frankly, had you told me back in 2019 that we would be doing a ton of telemedicine  visits, I would have thought, what? You know, we can't do that. We got to see the people.  We got to have them there in person. We got to check their thing, right? I mean, you got to  do that, right? No, you don't.  [0:37:20]  09 /01/25   Page   of 13   14

SSC 2.0 - 408: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 2  So now we do a ton of our follow-up via telemedicine and Dr. Mangelson uses this the  most in our Salt Lake practice. And as of this recording, he's still doing them personally.  That will likely change here pretty soon, but he likes to do them. And his average telemedi -  cine visit is six minutes. That might take you by surprise. Six minutes that he is on the  computer with that. What he does too is a little pearl for you, is he has the Doxy program  there and then right next to him, he has his computer on Freed AI, F-R-E-E-D.AI, and  there's other programs out there like this. That's a note taker for doctors that is creating the  soap note for that encounter. So he's just talking to the patient, the freed AI hears the  whole conversation, writes the encounter, he is then able to cut and paste that into our  electronic health record. Awesome.  [0:38:21]  Do you know how much time that has saved us? So when we first started doing that, I re -  member talking to Kevin. He's like, wow, I looked at the schedule the other day. I kind of  freaked out a little bit because there was holes everywhere in the schedule. I was like, oh  my goodness, you know, the schedule is falling apart. What's going on? And then he said,  and then I realized that on that Monday, I was doing 20 telemed follow-ups. Well, to put  those 20 patients in there, historically, that would have been 20, like 40 minutes appoint -  ments scattered around and turning the room and everything else, that's a ton of time.  Whereas with these now six minute telemedicine, that has saved us a fortune in turning  rooms and chair time and things like that and made our capacity much, much greater than  it was before.  [0:39:10]  So please consider using that from the get-go and this will help you tremendously to be  more profitable. And frankly too, patients don't want to come in anyway. So this isn't just  like kind of all about us and making it all for us. This is what the patient wants. You know,  think, put yourself in that situation there. Would you rather go into the doctor and fight traf -  fic and find parking and do all that kind of stuff and sit in the stupid waiting room and even -  tually get in and they're probably running late and whatever, or sit at your computer doing  whatever you're doing anyway, continuing to do what you're doing, And if they're late, you  don't care because you're still doing what you're doing. And then they kind of come up and  it alerts you and boom, there you are. And it's very efficient. And then you're done and you  never left, you know, your house or you never left your job. You never left anything. You  were there. That is what people want. Absolutely lean into that. That'll make you far more  profitable and far more popular with your patients.  [outro music]  09 /01/25   Page   of 14   14

