SSC 2.0 - 501: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 1  SSC 2.0   Level 5  501: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its  Connection to Almost Everything Part 1  [intro music]  OSA and its Connections to Almost Everything   [0:00:12]  Welcome to Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connections to Almost Everything. Now, just  this morning, as I was getting ready for my day and getting a few things done, I was listen -  ing to a podcast, as I will do and as probably you do quite a bit too. And this podcast was  on nutrition and overall health and things like that. And there was a guest on who was  speaking a bit about nitric oxide and was doing so in a way that I'd heard many of the  things before. And then some of the things, not as much as I'd heard before. And he was  clearly an expert on nitric oxide and how it's produced in the body and the endothelium.  And interestingly, he talked about the endothelium being an organ system. I don't remem -  ber hearing that described that way before. But as you know, we have tens of thousands  of miles of blood vessels, and it's in the endothelium of the arteries that nitric oxide is pro -  duced. And then that's through a dietary pathway and in harmony with the microbiome in  our oral cavity and all sorts of stuff. Cool stuff. If you don't know much about that, you can  certainly learn more about that.  [0:01:27]  But here's the reason I start with this story is I kind of scroll down into some of the com -  ments and someone said, whenever I hear an expert like this person connect every health  problem in the world with the thing that they're an expert in, I roll my eyes a bit. And I com -  pletely get that. I've heard on actually this same podcast, this and you have probably expe -  rienced this too. If you follow any podcasters, you will see often that they will have multiple  different people on, which I think is great. It's great about this area of education and news  and interest that we can take in nowadays, that they will have people of different opinions.  And every once in a while, people like Joe Rogan and others, they'll bring on people with  conflicting views and have them debate right there while they are moderating that debate.  This was not one of those types of things. This was a person who is really, really, really  expert in one topic talking about that one topic. And I've seen other similar experts on this  person's podcast where they will talk about their expertise and how that connects to every  problem that there is of a health nature in the world, like insulin resistance.  [0:02:58]  And then someone else may talk about a diet approach and maybe they are pro-carnivore  and maybe someone else is pro-vegan and maybe someone else is other and maybe  09/01/25   Page   of 1   14

SSC 2.0 - 501: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 1  someone is very into long, slow distance running and someone else is like, no, you should  only sprint and they'll all have these different things and whatever they're the expert in,  they will tend to connect or correlate with all sorts of stuff. So am I saying that that's the  case a bit with obstructive sleep apnea? Yeah, it is. And we're going to go through this and  we need to recognize that bias in us. You are going to tend to see what you're looking for  and you're going to tend to not see what you aren't looking for. This is why I put in level  five in Spencer Study Club is for us to go a little deeper. And I am not an expert in all of the  things in this level. Most of the things in this level, I am not an expert. You'll notice as you  watch level one, level two, level three, my entire style of lecturing even is different. Well,  how come? Well, because I do that.  [0:04:17]  That's what we do. I've treated tens of thousands of patients. My practices treat hundreds  of patients a month and I am involved with that. I mentor people like you, have mentored  well over a thousand dentists at this point and do these things that I teach. So therefore,  I'm one of these experts on the podcast that is really knowledgeable about this two mil -  limeters wide, but I'm 10 miles deep on that two millimeters. But as we then get out to the  edges of this, I'm not as deep in my knowledge, but I'm aware of it. I've said this a hundred  times if I've said it once, but this is why I encourage you to make relationships with your  local community, your local medical community, your local dental community, because all  of us are smarter than any of us. And as we take in this information, as we experiment with  that a little bit, why do I listen to some of these podcasts and stuff? Well, I'm interested in  my health and in my family's health. And we will experiment with some of this stuff. I have  been pure vegan. I am currently almost carnivore, not quite, but very low carb.  [0:05:34]  I've been very high carb. I've done all sorts of stuff. I've qualified for the Boston Marathon.  Right now, I'm doing more sprinting and weightlifting, and I'm seeing how this affects me  with that whole N of one principle, right? We always have to take the evidence, the re -  search, the averages that are in those research studies, and as we go to the most power -  ful systematic reviews and meta-analyses, which is taking all sorts of studies and putting  them together, the more we do that, the farther away we get from the individual. You and I  treat individuals. We don't treat stats. We don't treat averages. We don't treat epidemiolog -  ic trends. We treat people. So now let's jump into this, but go in recognizing that, yeah, al -  most everything we're going to talk about in this session is going to be related, and we see  this all the time with people with obstructive sleep apnea, where we sometimes will make  an error is thinking that all these things are caused by obstructive sleep apnea, and then  also thinking that all these things should go away once that obstructive sleep apnea is tak -  en care of. Man, do I wish it was that easy.  [0:07:00]  Yeah, and so do you. Man, do I wish that all bruxism was related to obstructive sleep ap -  nea, and we could blow air up the face or stick a thing in the mouth and cure all bruxism  and never have to worry about what type of dental material we put in the mouth anymore  because no one would ever break it because they don't have sleep apnea, so therefore  09/01/25   Page   of 2   14

SSC 2.0 - 501: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 1  they don't brux. Wouldn't that be great? Man, I wish that all depression was just obstructive  sleep apnea that's missed in these young, fit females. Wouldn't that be great if all we had  to do is blow air up their nose or stick a thing in their mouth or do whatever other treat -  ments to make it so their airway didn't collapse at night when they slept and they wouldn't  be depressed anymore? That'd be amazing. Man, do I wish that cardiac disease was all  obstructive sleep apnea. Wouldn't it be amazing if we could eliminate the number one killer  of men and women by blowing air up their nose or sticking a thing in their mouth or the  other treatments that we have in our armamentarium for obstructive sleep apnea? Unfor -  tunately, it's not that simple.  [0:08:07]  So we are those experts on this topic, but just remember that there's probably someone  else out there that is doing similar things, and you'll come across this, that are doing simi -  lar things as far as what they believe is connecting all the dots, and it has nothing to do  with obstructive sleep apnea. However, having said all that, it is extremely rare that I lis -  tened to one of these health podcasts, including the one I was listening to today, the guy  talking about nitric oxide, where sleep isn't brought up. And once again, it was. He was  talking about how sleep affects production of nitric oxide and how mouth breathing is bad  for nitric oxide production and how we should be breathing through our nose and that this  guy tapes his mouth shut at night to try to retrain himself into not being a mouth breather  and stuff like that. So there are lots of corollaries here. There's a Venn diagram, and sleep  apnea is almost always in that Venn diagram someplace. So there's my opening to this be -  ing connected to everything.  TED Talk   [0:09:23]  Let's jump in. Now, if you remember all the way back in level one where I just give the in -  troduction to sleep, I start off with a video from Dr. Matthew Walker, and it's his TED Talk. If  you haven't seen his TED Talk, I would strongly encourage you to go and watch that. If  you've not read Why We Sleep, I would extremely strongly encourage you to read or listen  to Why We Sleep. It is excellent. I had been doing this for a long time, had seen many,  many, many people speak on sleep apnea, including people like John Remmers, Christian  Gimeno, they are the founding fathers of the field, and I still learned a ton when I read this  book, particularly about stage two sleep, which until I read this book, I thought was just  kind of like, yeah, it's kind of junk food sleep. As a matter of fact, I used to describe N2  sleep as junk food sleep and then deep sleep and REM sleep as your nutritious sleep. And  that's actually not the case. N2 sleep is super important too, just like N3 sleep and REM  sleep. So go in and check out this book and learn about all the awesome things that hap -  pen when we sleep, and as he says in his TED Talk, and the bad things that happen when  we don't get enough.  [0:10:48]  09/01/25   Page   of 3   14

SSC 2.0 - 501: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 1  Now, my criticism of Dr. Walker's work is, in my opinion, when he's talking about all the  awesome things that happen with sleep, he could have ended every chapter by saying,  like just go and talk about all the awesome stuff that happens in stage two sleep, and  maybe that's like covered over four or five chapters of all the different cool things that hap -  pen, and then there'd be one line. And that line would say, but what does your brain care  more about? All this awesome stuff that I just described, or air. That's really the question  that we're going to address here. So some of the things that happen in these different  stages, in stage one, the benefit of stage one sleep prepares the body for deeper sleep.  You ever even thought about that? So why do we have stage one sleep? Well, it is this  transition stage, but maybe there's some good stuff with that. As a matter of fact, we know  that people that hit the pillow and go immediately into REM, that that's a problem. That's  showing that they're sleep deprived and their body's trying to compensate or adapt for that  sleep deprivation. So stage one sleep in and of itself is good.  [0:12:03]  It is warming you up for that sleep. It's like maybe stretching out before you go on a run so  that you don't get injured. Stage two sleep enhances memory consolidation and your body  begins to relax. This memory consolidation, I think I got that wrong earlier on in my career  and connected memory completely with REM sleep, but stage two sleep has a lot to do  with this as well. Stage three sleep, deep sleep. This is essential for physical recovery, tis -  sue growth and repair, strengthening of the immune system. Now this we've known for a  long time is really physical in nature. How I've taught this in the past is that if you don't get  deep sleep, you don't repair. If you're a child and you're not getting deep sleep, you will not  grow like you should. If you're an adult and you don't get deep sleep, you're probably go -  ing to hurt. Then we have our REM sleep, the rapid eye movement sleep. This supports  learning and memory. So see that there is some overlap there with stage two. Processes  emotions promotes brain development. And we also believe that within these stages is a  flushing out of toxins in the brain. All sorts of awesome stuff. So that's brief, you know, one  sentence, two sentence descriptions of what happens in that. Dr. Walker's book is this  thick and goes into detail on each of those stages.  [0:13:37]  Something I'd like to teach when I'm teaching beginner dentists and something to discuss  with your patients and point out to them is that non REM sleep and particularly deep sleep  is physical restoration and the REM sleep is more mental or brain restoration. So another  way to say that is if you don't get good quality deep sleep, you're going to hurt. You're not  going to repair your tissues like you should. If you don't get good REM sleep, you're not  going to be able to think the way you should. You're going to be cloudy. You're going to  forget things, things like that. And this has greater implications than just that when we talk  about Alzheimer's and other stuff that we'll talk about here in this session. But that's kind of  the, in a nutshell, just think of the non REM stages as being more physical in nature of  restorative and then the REM sleep being more brain in nature restorative.  09/01/25   Page   of 4   14

SSC 2.0 - 501: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 1  Good Night’s Sleep or Air?   [0:14:34]  Once again though, what do you think your brain cares more about? all that awesome stuff  that happens in non REM and REM or air? If you haven't asked your patients that ques -  tion, I think that's a good thing to do too to help them understand. Everybody knows that  sleep's important. I mean, everybody knows that, right? And you can talk to your patient  about that and say, yeah, you know, good night's sleep, that's worth its weight in gold,  right? I mean, we all, and especially if they're over 30 or 40, because when you're a  teenager, you don't really realize that necessarily. And teenagers like to sleep a long time  and can sleep a long time and need to sleep a long time, but they don't worry as much  about sleep hygiene things and stuff like that because they can kind of just sleep any -  where, anytime, in any position and in any environment and they do fine. As you get older,  then it's like got to have the room just at this right temperature and make sure it's not, that  there's no light anywhere and make sure this and make sure that and got to have your  right pillow and stuff like that, right? We've talked about before. I think as you're talking to  your patients about those things and they say, oh yeah, you know, good night's sleep, that  is just so important to me.  [0:15:50]  And then you say, with as important as that is, with that as important as we know it is, what  do you think our brain or our body cares more about? A great night's sleep or air? Every -  one that you ever talk to is going to be like, well, probably air, right? Exactly. That's why  we're doing what we're doing here. Your problem is that your airway is compromised when  you sleep and that compromise of your airway is making your brain wake up your body so  that you can breathe okay because your brain's kind of weighing out the cost-benefit ratio  there. It's like, well, this deep sleep that Jamison's in right now is really important but he's  not breathing very well and if he doesn't breathe well then he's not around any longer so  better wake him up out of the deep sleep and make sure he's breathing. Okay? It's kind of  fascinating stuff. One of the other things, I have lots of different hobbies and whatnot, and  Jenny and I recently moved to Puerto Rico and so I'm looking at getting into free diving  and spearfishing and stuff like that. And one of the things that can happen when people  free dive, one of the great risks of that, and I'm not talking about getting into the sport of  free diving where the people just dive as deep as they possibly can to set a record or  whatever. That is zero desire to do that.  [0:17:32]  But to be able to dive down, you know, 20, 30, 40, 50 feet and do things like that in the  ocean, that does appeal to me. But even people that are doing this recreationally and are  spearfishing or things like that will have what are called shallow water blackouts. And that  is they get almost to the surface, like within a few feet of the surface, and they go uncon -  scious. And it's interesting to me as I learn more about this and have read some books on  this and James Nestor, the guy who wrote the book Breathe, what got him down that road  of breath and the whole thing, that book was very, very popular, became a really big deal.  09/01/25   Page   of 5   14

SSC 2.0 - 501: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 1  If you didn't know this, you can go on to our archives. And James Nestor was a guest on  our monthly Zoom meeting for Spencer Study Club several years ago, relatively shortly  after that book had been published and was kind enough to come on our podcast because  he's a friend of Noah Siegel's, who's Dr. Siegel is a friend of mine. So we were able to do  that. But anyway, the book that got him interested in that is about free divers.  [0:18:51]  And I listened to that book of his and learned quite a bit about that. But my point of all this  is when the person blacks out, it's interesting the physiology of that. When the brain thinks  that it has too much carbon dioxide, because that's the main driver of respiration, is carbon  dioxide buildup, not lack of oxygen. If you were to hold your breath or you're swimming  underwater or something like that, and you're trying to hold your breath, it's not the lack of  oxygen that makes you feel like I got to breathe right now. It's the buildup of carbon diox -  ide. Interesting. Also, I'm doing a triathlon in a couple of weeks and I'm not a very good  swimmer, so I've had to train on swimming. And if you were not a high school level com -  petitive swimmer, you know how this goes. You could be a runner, biker, anybody can do  those things. But you get in a pool and you start to swim and you start to panic, basically.  And why that is, is not actually because you're not getting enough oxygen, it's because  you're not blowing out the CO2. So as soon as you learn the little trick of as soon as your  face is in the water, you need to be blowing out your air pretty hard.  [0:20:12]  And then you take your deep breath and then you blow out the air on two or three strokes  and you take a quick breath and you blow out the air and you're always constantly focused  on blowing out the air. As soon as I learned that, I watched my heart rate go from 130,  135, 140 beats per minute down to 100, sometimes less than 100. Swimming. So I'm still  doing the activity, I'm still doing the activity, but I'm not stressed anymore because my  brain realizes, okay, we're fine here. There's breathing going on, the carbon dioxide is get -  ting pushed off. Back to the free diving story. I'm going all over the place, aren't I here?  Back to the free diving story. The person will black out. Why do they black out? Well, they  black out so that they'll breathe. So your body will actually have you pass out so that it can  take control of the situation, presumably, allowing you to breathe. So when people have  this and they black out, now the danger is they're in water, which that kind of sucks.  [0:21:16]  So I was watching a thing on this the other day and this guy was like, yeah, it was a couple  spearfishermen talking to each other and one says to the other guy, he's like, hey, I noticed  when you came up, you had your snorkel in your mouth. I've been taught since I was a lit -  tle kid that you don't do that when you're free diving, that you spit your snorkel out. And  because the reason that you don't have your snorkel in your mouth is the snorkel will be  full of water. And if you blacked out close to the surface, then now you've got a snorkel full  of water. And when you go to breathe in, you're going to get a mouthful of water, lungs full  of water. And the other guy, the Frenchman, who was one of the world's greatest free diver  spearfisherman guys says, well, yeah, I know you're told that, but I don't think that's true  because if you think about it, if you have the snorkel in your mouth and you come up, the  09/01/25   Page   of 6   14

SSC 2.0 - 501: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 1  last thing I do is as I am right up to the surface as I am blowing out all the rest of my air  through my snorkel, clearing the water out of my snorkel.  [0:22:23]  And he says, most of the time people don't black out till they actually get to the surface.  And so if you were to get to the surface and you've blacked out, now the danger is they're  in water. But you've got an airway. The snorkel is in the air. And as you come back online  and you breathe, you're going to have that airway. Whereas otherwise, if the snorkel is not  in your mouth and you're face down in the water and you come back online to breathe,  you're going to take on a big old breath of water. So anyway, what does your body care  more about? Air. It cares a lot about air is the bottom line. Lots of different stories there for  you. Hope you enjoyed that. Probably you didn't, but that's all right. And maybe you can  look into some of these things too. And it's just all kind of fascinating learning for us. So let  me take you back to the point that started that whole 15-minute digression. Talk to your  patients about this. Help them to understand that your body cares a lot about air. Your  brain cares a lot about air. Your brain will do things to make gosh darn sure you get air. It  doesn't care about REM sleep to the same level it cares about air. It cares about REM  sleep, but only if you got air. So air is the most important.  Strange World of Sleeping Disorders   [0:23:42]  So this is a nice infographic, sleepopolis.com, that has all of the different sleep disorders.  And if you got your boards in dental sleep and stuff, you kind of went through a lot of these  different deals. And the reason I always like to point this out to us as dentists is there's a  lot of different sleep-related problems. There's a lot of sleep disorders. And what we're  talking about mostly all the time in Spencer Study Club and as dentists involved in dental  sleep medicine is this one right here, obstructive sleep apnea. That's it. Okay, note there's  central sleep apnea, but we know that central sleep apnea, usually it exists with obstruc -  tive sleep apnea. But if it was completely on its own, oral appliance therapy is not going to  help that person, either CPAP is going to help that person. So that's a completely different  thing. So obstructive sleep apnea, that is our realm. And then we have all these other  things that we don't necessarily deal with.  [0:24:44]  Snoring we do. And then bruxism is going to be somewhere in here as well. Oh, here it is  over here on the other side. So sleep bruxism. So as dentists, sleep bruxism, obstructive  sleep apnea, and snoring, that's our role in this. Now in level five here, there's been all  sorts of different things that we've talked about. And that's to give us, make sure that we  have at least a baseline knowledge of these things so that when we've treated people for  the three different things that we are involved in and they aren't feeling better, we're at  least knowledgeable enough to know about like, hey, well, maybe you've got this other  sleep disorder. Let's get you back to the sleep doctor. Let's talk to your primary care doc -  09/01/25   Page   of 7   14

SSC 2.0 - 501: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 1  tor. So be aware of these. Again, I don't think that it's necessary for us dentists to be abso -  lutely expert in all of the different parasomnias and dysomnias and all of the different  things that are going on there. We need to be experts in what we do. Our medical col -  leagues have no clue about TMJ problems and no clue about what level of periodontitis is  so much that you would need to be worried about the patient having oral appliance.  [0:25:57]  So they're not probably reading up in their spare time about periodontal disease because  they're concerned about prescribing oral appliance therapy for people with periodontal dis -  ease. I don't think that we have to do this either. On the other hand, you may be interested  in it. And as a hobby, you could learn more about these things, but don't go nuts either. I  know a lot of dentists sometimes will go down these rabbit holes and they get very con -  fused, frankly, because they start, you know, like I said, when I opened here, you only see  what you're looking for and you don't tend to see what you're not looking for. You will no -  tice as you learn more about whatever, you will tend to see that everywhere. That's one of  the boons and banes of the whole podcast thing that I was talking about before is you start  learning about that stuff. You're like, dang, every patient that I have is insulin resistant.  Every patient that I have is metabolic disorder. Every patient that I have is probably low on  vitamin D. Now, everything I just said is probably true. Okay, that probably in reality is true.  But then sometimes you feel a little paralyzed because you're like, well, what can I do?  [0:27:04]  I want you to understand more the 80-20 principle here. And this applies to almost every -  thing in our lives, but 20% is causing 80%. So 20% of that disorder is causing 80% of the  dysfunction, the effects, the symptoms, the everything else. This is why we win so much  with obstructive sleep apnea because the brain cares most about air. So if we can make  the airway patent, that is oftentimes the 20% or less that's causing the 80% or more of that  patient's problems. But it isn't always the case, right? So that's why we tend to focus on  these big things that can have big results, even though it's a relatively small thing. If you  take everything globally into account of what's going on with that patient, I like the 80-20  way of looking at stuff. Over the years, being involved in craniofacial pain and things like  that, I've gone to lots and lots and lots of conferences where they get really into the weeds  on some of these really, really relatively minor things. And I think you can kind of go nuts  when you're kind of like, well, it's probably the electronic waves, right?  [0:28:19]  I mean, gosh, I'm standing pretty close to some lights right now as I'm recording this, and I  got my cell phone sitting over here, and that's probably what's jacking me up. Maybe. But  I'm pretty sure if I'm not breathing well, that's going to take precedence. Bottom line, make  sure that you are at least loosely aware of all of these different sleep disorders, that you  are relatively conversant in them, that you know the difference of these so that when your  patients bring them up, you know where to go.  [0:28:52]  Quick story that I talk about in level two, I believe, is sometimes when you're treating ob -  structive sleep apnea, you will uncover other sleep disorders. And that means that the ob -  09/01/25   Page   of 8   14

SSC 2.0 - 501: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 1  structive sleep apnea, that airway, is that kind of 20-80 thing there. But as soon as you  make the airway patent by giving them an oral appliance and now their airway can't ob -  struct anymore, other stuff comes up. So the example that I've probably shared with you  before is I had a patient who's in the summer. He has short-sleeved shirt on. He comes in  and he's doing awesome with his oral appliance therapy. I notice he's got a bunch of  scratches on his arm.  [0:29:29]  I'm like, hey, what happened there? Are you in a rosebush or something? What hap -  pened? Did you get a fight with your cat? And he's like, well, close. I'm having dreams that  I'm being attacked by a cat and I'm actually biting and scratching my own arm. And I was  like, whoa. That means your oral appliance is working. Okay, now if you've heard me tell  that story before, you understand how I made that connection. What did that guy have? So  he's dreaming about cats attacking him and then he is acting out those behaviors. That's  called REM behavior disorder. So that's where you act out your dreams. Now what does  your brain care more about, so to speak, REM behavior disorder on the list of stuff that are  important to the brain, REM behavior disorder versus obstructive sleep apnea? Well, ob -  structive sleep apnea would be the highest. So if you're having obstructive sleep apnea,  what are you probably not going to have? You're not going to have as much REM. So this  guy didn't have enough REM to show that he had REM behavior disorder until his obstruc -  tive sleep apnea was treated. This can happen with all sorts of stuff. That the obstructive  sleep apnea, once you treat it, it could actually uncover some insomnia.  [0:30:48]  It could uncover sleepwalking. It could uncover REM behavior disorder. It could uncover  some of these other problems. Now in my opinion, this is when we say, hey, your oral ap -  pliance worked. So I didn't say, hey, let me put you on medications for your REM behavior  disorder. I said, hey, your oral appliance works. That's my job. Now let me punch you back  to the sleep doctor who sent you here in the first place and let's get that REM behavior  disorder looked at. Cool? But that's only because I knew what was going on.  Lack of Sleep   [0:31:16]  All right, so let's go into some of these things. So lack of sleep, insufficient sleep can in -  crease the risk of health problems, chronic conditions, including cognitive problems, in -  creased inflammation, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and overall mortality. All right, so  everything, right? So almost everything is going to fit into that sentence. And that's lack of  sleep. So short sleep we're talking about right here. Now obstructive sleep apnea obvious -  ly can result in shorter sleep. But this is just known for people who don't sleep that much.  Poor Sleep in General   [0:31:49]  09/01/25   Page   of 9   14

SSC 2.0 - 501: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 1  So here is poor sleep in general, and this is considered less than seven hours a night. And  the percentages over here on the legend of this map here. So the darker color there is  37.6 to 48.4% of the population in that area having short sleep duration. That's pretty  shocking, isn't it? Now you may look at this map and you're like, all right, I swear I've seen  that before. And you're probably thinking of map that looks like this, which is always very  similar. So the obesity rate map and the short sleep, poor sleep map tends to overlap the  higher obesity rates. Okay, that makes sense as well. But also there's just other factors  that are involved there. In the southeast, for example, you have a lot of shift workers. You  kind of see the rust belt here in that area. And we also have higher obesity rates there. The  southeast higher obesity rates for sure. There's the most obese country. This was in 2022.  53% of adults are obese. I've talked about this before, but our entire thought process  about obesity has actually changed quite a bit. What is overweight nowadays is probably  considered normal weight. If you were just to look at people, so a BMI over 25 is over -  weight. And tons of people, you see the vast majority of people are technically overweight  based on BMI.  [0:33:42]  And I'm not talking like the dude that's put on 10 pounds of muscle and has a 30 inch  waist. Yeah, that guy on the BMI scale is probably overweight. But that's not what I'm talk -  ing about. I'm just talking about your average Joe public. And you see somebody, if you go  to the store or you go wherever and you're just kind of scanning around like I do some -  times and checking obesity rates in your local store or whatever. Some of the people  you're kind of like normal weight, probably technically BMI would be in the overweight  scale. Nevertheless, the reason I show these two graphics is to show that poor sleep, obe -  sity tend to go together. Now you may be thinking, well, yeah, obese people are more like -  ly to have sleep apnea. Right. But we start eventually having to ask ourselves chicken and  the egg questions here. What's driving what? Is it the obesity that drives the sleep apnea?  Is it the sleep apnea that drives the obesity? Is it the sleep disorder that drove the obesity  in the first place that created the sleep apnea? You see what I'm saying? So we've got this  chicken and the egg.  [0:34:51]  We've got this hamster wheel thing going on here. And this is also why you can listen to  the 10 different podcasts and have 10 different opinions on how do we get the hamster off  the wheel? How do we engage with this person wherever they are in that to get them out  of this cycle?  Short Sleep <7 and Long Sleep >8   [0:35:11]  So short sleep and long sleep are both risk factors for obesity, diabetes, hypertension,  cognitive impairment, and mood disturbance. Less than seven, greater than eight. Sleep -  09/01/25   Page   of 10   14

SSC 2.0 - 501: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 1  ing seven to nine hours reduces risk for chronic disease. By the way, this eight hours of  sleep is a research average, right? So there are individuals who need less sleep and indi -  viduals who need more sleep. How do you know? So this is easier said than done, but the  way that you find out how much sleep you or any of your loved ones or a patient really  need is the following. You go to sleep at the same time every night for multiple weeks and  then you, after 10 days plus of going to bed at the same time and ideally getting up when -  ever you wake up, after a week, week and a half of doing that, you will then be into a peri -  od of like, okay, this is how much sleep I need.  [0:36:24]  So this has been done in research studies where they will take people, put them to bed,  and the first two or three nights, everybody in the study will get nine, 10, 11 hours of sleep.  They will sleep a ton. And sometimes in these studies, it's, they have kind of nothing else  to do as well. So they're just kind of left, they can do some stuff, but they have to stay in  this environment. And so they will tend to sleep more. And then after about a week or so,  then they get to the point where they are sleeping seven to eight hours and that's pretty  much all they can sleep. That's just as much sleep as their body needs. Okay, so the  whole trick in that is the going to bed at the same time and then giving yourself enough  time to sleep. So here's the problem is you have, if you have to get up at six o'clock to go  to work and you're thinking, okay, well, I'll go to bed every night at 10. Great, so that would  give you eight hours in bed. Maybe that gives you seven and a half hours of sleep, but  maybe you need more than seven and a half hours.  [0:37:30]  So you would probably actually need to go to bed at nine o'clock for a while. And if you  went to bed at nine o'clock and you got woken up by your alarm at six o'clock for a week in  a row, then you might have to take that to 8:30. You see what I'm saying? So you would  have to experiment with this a little bit if the set factor is I have to get up at six. So most of  the patients that you work with are gonna be, that's their life, right? They have to get up at  a certain time. They can't just like wake up whenever they wake up. So that'll be the limit -  ing factor is my alarm is going to go off at this time. They have to then go back in time and  then ideally they would go to bed about nine hours before that alarm's gonna go off. And  then theoretically they don't need nine hours of sleep. So after an initial sleep debt repay -  ment period of a few days, then they would get into the cycle of like, okay, this is how  much I actually need.  [0:38:27]  And then they could adjust accordingly. Okay, does that make sense? That's how you fig -  ure out how much sleep you need. And it is individual. So I need less sleep than Jenny  does. And as I've talked about in other sessions here, Jenny needs more time in bed to get  the amount of sleep that she needs. Because her sleep is not as continuous as mine is.  So there's those two things going on. I don't need as much sleep as she does. And she  also requires more time in bed to get the amount of sleep that she needs. So she may be  in bed for an hour, hour and a half more than I am, but that may only give her an extra half  hour of actual sleep, and she needs that extra half hour of sleep compared to me. How do  09/01/25   Page   of 11   14

SSC 2.0 - 501: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 1  I know? Well, because of tracking. So I have the Garmin watch here. She uses the Oura  ring. And then also just lifestyle has allowed us to be able to track this stuff in that we can  go to bed at a certain time. Now we don't necessarily have to get up with an alarm clock at  six o'clock in the morning.  [0:39:29]  Last point on this slide here, sleeping more than nine hours, not necessarily harmful, may  be helpful for young adults. Most young adults need nine hours of sleep or more. People  are recovering from sickness. Clearly, if you're sick, you're gonna sleep a ton. And not just  sickness, but if you've had like a surgery or something like that, then sleep is obviously  good for you. And for people that are sleep deprived. So the reason that you will see long  sleep being greater than eight hours and that related to depression in particular, but other  all-cause mortality stuff. The all-cause mortality kind of makes sense because if people  have sicknesses, if they have cancer, for example, they may sleep a ton more than if they  weren't sick. And so that might skew the data just a little bit. But in general, people that are  adults in particular that are sleeping nine, 10 hours a day, it's not necessarily healthy. But  remember, N of one, right? We're treating the patient, not statistics. To use an extreme ex -  ample, I've read about elite level triathletes, for example, and that's their job. So their job is  training and racing in triathlons.  [0:40:45]  And they tend to sleep 10 plus hours a day. They train hours and hours and hours a day.  Their entire life is training, eating, and sleeping. And they take a nap. This is also the elite  marathon runners that I've read about, stuff like that, like the Africans, will go for a little 15  to 20 mile run in the morning at like seven minute pace, right? Just an easy run for them.  And they'll go out and then they'll come back and they'll eat a big meal and they'll take a  nap. And then they'll go out and do another workout and then they get home and they eat  and then they get 10 hours of sleep and then they start it all over again. So there are out -  liers with all of these things. One quick story on a short sleeper is I met a young man once  and we were, I think we were at a church function and I noticed he did something. He was  quoting a scripture and he went in his Bible and then he quoted this scripture and I  glanced at where he was in the Bible and I realized that the scripture that he was quoting  was not where he was in the Bible.  [0:42:02]  So when I had a moment later, I kind of called him out on it. I'm like, hey, when you quoted  that scripture, you opened up the Bible but that's not where that scripture is in the Bible.  And he goes, yeah, “I have it memorized”. I'm like, oh, okay, cool. I'm like, you have what  memorized? And he's like, “well, actually I have the Bible memorized”. I'm like, I'm sorry,  you what? And he's like, “well, I have a photographic memory”. “Everything that I've ever  seen, I can recall.” And I tested him on this and it was not a parlor trick. It was not, this guy  had a legit photographic memory and he was also a short sleeper. So he slept less than  an hour a day. And I was doing this for a living at the time and so that fascinated me. And  he wasn't that healthy, as you might imagine. So you need sleep. And so then I did re -  search on this and guess what? Almost all the people that have his disorder have that type  09/01/25   Page   of 12   14

SSC 2.0 - 501: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 1  of memory, which is interesting. They tend to be brilliant. They tend to be at places like  MIT.  [0:43:23]  And the sad part though is they don't tend to live that long. And it's difficult. So again, this  is not a matter of not giving yourself enough time. This young man had plenty of time to  sleep, but he couldn't. He would only sleep for this... And I actually asked him about that  too. I'm like, well, with sleeping that little, how do you know when to sleep? And he's like,  well, my body tells me when to sleep. All right, there you go. And he's like, yeah, and then  I'll sleep and I'll wake up and I'll be fully alert and it's not a problem physically. And he was  a young guy, so he's like 20 years old. So he looked very fit and whatnot. So that hadn't  kind of taken its toll yet. But in my research on ultra short sleepers, as you might imagine,  life expectancy is significantly reduced. That kind of sucks. So that's a little bit on just kind  of normal amount of sleep, how to figure out how much sleep you need, how to give your  patients the task of how to figure out how much sleep they need, working with your own  kids, working with your parents, working with others and understanding that in your family  itself, you may have children that need more sleep than others, your spouse may need  more sleep or less sleep than you, and that all of these things are within normal limits, that  we have this variability from individual to individual, but here are some general rules of  thumb of what is a normal amount of sleep.  Recommended Hours of Sleep   [0:44:49]  On the recommended hours of sleep, we go from 12 to 16 hours for infants down to 11 to  14 for toddlers, 10 to 13 for preschool, 9 to 12 for school-aged, 8 to 10 for teen, and 7 or  more for adults. So teenagers still in that 8 to 10 realm, and that's, well, actually, this area  right here is our most problematic. So school-aged and teenagers, so we got 9 to 12 in our  6 to 12-year-olds and 8 to 10 in our teenagers. What's the problem with that? School is the  problem with that, right? So in order for, with school-aged kids, with 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11-year-  olds, little easier because you can compel them to go to bed earlier, and for the most part,  they will. So my grandchildren, so my granddaughter, you'll see a picture of her in a minute  here, is 6, okay? And so it's still totally normal for her to be in bed at eight o'clock, and that  gives her enough time, plenty of time, to get in this 10 hours of sleep.  [0:46:04]  But when she's a teenager one day, and then that whole circadian rhythm shift kinda hap -  pens too, and teenagers become more night owls, so they don't really feel like they want to  go to sleep, they don't have that sleep drive, it's called, until 10:30, 11, 11:30, but then they  gotta get up at 5, and if they're in sports, I mentioned swimming a little while ago, any of  you that have been a swimmer or have kids that are swimmers, you know that they're get -  ting up at like 4:30 in the morning to go hit the pool before school. Some of you have kids  that go to religious study stuff before school. Okay, that's really shortening that sleep. So a  09/01/25   Page   of 13   14

SSC 2.0 - 501: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 1  lot of these teenagers now are only getting five, six hours of sleep. So about roughly half  of what they should get, and that is a massive problem. So there have been a few areas in  the country that have legislated later start times for school. One would think that that would  just be an obvious thing to do. The problem becomes actually busing becomes the big is -  sue there, that there's only so many buses, and so they can only pick up the kids in certain  ways.  [0:47:30]  And so they got to pick up this group of kids first, then they go get the younger kids and  whatever. And then when you roll that back, now it's in the afternoon. And if they got to do  that same busing type of thing, it's possible that some kids could be going home in the  dark. So that's some of the logistical problems. From a physiological medical issue, it'd be  like, yeah, obvious, we should start school at 10 o'clock. Some countries do start school  later. In Europe, kids go to school later than they do in the United States. If you have kids  or grandkids, you may look into that and you may even talk to. I remember my two  youngest being at a charter school, and I talked to that school about later start times. And  they did start later than the public schools. Not late enough, in my opinion, but it was later.  And again, the pushback, I say not as late as I would have liked, but imagine that you  have kids and some kids are in the public school and some kids are in the charter school.  [0:48:35]  And one kid has to go at 7:45 and the other kid doesn't go till 9:30, but then you have a  job. So now what do you do? So I get it. It's very, very difficult. Just keep this in mind of  how much sleep do they really need, which is a lot more than they're usually getting.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 14   14

