SSC 2.0 - 502: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 2  SSC 2.0   Level 5  502: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its  Connection to Almost Everything Part 2  [intro music]  Ghrelin Hormone   [0:00:12]  So let's shift gears here a little bit and talk about some hormones, those being Ghrelin and  Leptin. So ghrelin greatens your appetite. So that's the way you remember which one does  what. So ghrelin, remember ghrelin greatens, ghrelin greatens. Next slide, you're going to  have leptin lessons. So ghrelin greatens appetite. Ghrelin is known as the hunger hor -  mone or the go hormone. This is mostly produced in your stomach, stimulates appetite,  plays a role in regulating the sleep-wake cycle. So ghrelin, remember greatens appetite  produced in your stomach. What does lack of sleep do? It increases ghrelin. It increases  your appetite. Lack of sleep. Lack of sleep from what? Well, lack of sleep just from lack of  sleep, as well as obstructive sleep apnea causing lack of sleep. So any of the million  things that could cause lack of sleep would impact ghrelin. Obstructive sleep apnea is one  of those things. So it's not necessarily that obstructive sleep apnea, the act of obstructing  increases ghrelin, but it's probably the screwing up of your sleep architecture and your to -  tal amount of sleep that is causing an increase in ghrelin. Regardless, this is well known  that people with obstructive sleep apnea have greater ghrelin.  [0:01:39]  If your obstructive sleep apnea is related to obesity and you have ghrelin that greatens  your appetite, what's the problem with that? Well, you're probably going to eat more, aren't  you? You have a greater appetite. Your brain is saying, feed me, feed me, feed me. Well,  actually, your stomach is. And you're going to do that. So what's that going to do? Increase  your weight. And a little increase of weight makes sleep apnea significantly worse. So  ghrelin over here, kind of our infographic here, stimulates appetite, as we discussed, in -  creases food intake because that's stimulated appetite, mediates glucose homeostasis,  protective effects on cardiovascular system. So that's a good part of it. Promotes fat stor -  age. That's not great. Mediates energy homeostasis, suppresses insulin secretion, re -  duces inflammation, regulation of body weight, and role in memory and stress. So that is  all of the different things that ghrelin does in our body. An important hormone, once again,  the things to remember. Ghrelin greatens, made in your stomach.  Leptin Hormone   [0:02:47]  09/01/25   Page   of 1   14

SSC 2.0 - 502: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 2  Now let's talk about leptin. Leptin lessens your appetite. Well, where's leptin comes from?  So leptin, known as the satiety hormone or no hormone, is produced in your fat cells. Isn't  that curious? So our fat cells produce leptin to be like, we're good. We don't need more of  this. That's fascinating to me. So even though we, in our abundant society that you enjoy  living in, as do I, we have abundance around us, but our bodies themselves are like, hey,  no, we're good, right? So we have leptin released by our fat cells to be like, we don't need  to eat more.  [0:03:36]  Leptin levels typically rise during sleep, promoting a feeling of fullness and reducing ap -  petite. So what does lack of sleep do? It decreases leptin. So lack of sleep increases ghre -  lin, which greatens your appetite. Lack of sleep decreases leptin, which lessens your ap -  petite. Said another way, you're always hungry. You never feel full. So leptin resistance, so  your body not responding to that leptin, in obesity, this leads to insulin resistance, causing  a person to keep eating despite having sufficient energy stores. So as I kind of started off  this whole session here, as I mentioned, there's a lot of people now that are talking about  insulin resistance all the time and got it. But isn't that interesting that leptin resistance  might lead before even the insulin resistance? Or again, chicken or the egg here, what is  resulting in what? And they're studying all of those things there.  [0:04:37]  Infographic over here. So leptin helps regulate synthesis of thyroid hormones, decreases  glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, increases your heart rate, regulates bone mass, regu -  lates the menstrual cycle, regulates appetite control of metabolism and energy ho -  meostasis, activation of your immune system, and highers or increases blood pressure. So  leptin involved in a bunch of metabolic pathways. And this is a real problem, obviously,  with people with obstructive sleep apnea. Increased ghrelin, decreased leptin. Increased  appetite, decreased satiety. Always feel hungry, never feel full. When you treat people for  their obstructive sleep apnea with oral appliance therapy, this is one of the reasons that it  is extremely common for us to see people lose 10 plus pounds in the first few months of  treatment. Because all of a sudden, when they're getting that better sleep, their ghrelin and  leptin levels are getting more appropriate. They will feel less hungry and they will feel full  faster. Therefore, they just won't eat as much. That's pretty awesome. And that's nothing  that you need to, you know, be involved in, but this is something else that you can teach  your patients. And I find this really powerful for our patients. And especially if you have a  patient that is overweight, and they have been told whatever they've been told.  [0:06:20]  And for most people, the common theme on being overweight that has been there for, oh,  geez, I don't know, 50 years probably at this point, maybe longer than that. Is what? If  you're overweight, it's why? It's because you eat too much and you move too little. The  caloric expenditure theory, the calories in, calories out theory, is that you're taking in too  much energy, and you're not using enough energy. And that kind of goes towards a  willpower type of thing. You're eating too much, and you're not working out enough. So a  lot of people that are overweight are going to feel not just self-conscious, but kind of guilty  09/01/25   Page   of 2   14

SSC 2.0 - 502: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 2  and not feel good about themselves because of that. And wonder why don't I have the self-  discipline to do this or whatever? Well, part of it is this. If your brain is always screaming to  you, your stomach, as it were, with ghrelin, you're hungry, and your fat cells aren't giving  off the stimulus to your brain to say you're full, well, that's a tough battle to win, right? Re -  gardless of any type of willpower that you may or may not have.  [0:07:48]  That's tough when everything that your brain is telling you is, I'm really hungry, I'm definite -  ly not full, I need to take in more calories. That's all the signals that your brain is being  flooded with here from ghrelin and leptin. I find it helpful to tell people that and to help  them to see that and to give them a little bit of that hope. It's like, hey, you know what's  kind of cool? And this is seen in CPAP too, is when we treat people with obstructive sleep  apnea and your airway is taken care of and you start getting that quality sleep that you're  supposed to, these things tend to get fixed. And a lot of our patients tell us, this is exactly  how I would say it, a lot of our patients tell us, and we've seen in a lot of our patients, that  they'll lose weight and they really didn't try anything. They didn't consciously change their  diet or their activity levels. On the activity levels, and this has nothing to do with ghrelin  and leptin per se, but if you're tired all the time, you're not thinking, let me go to the gym.  For a lot of these people that are sleep deprived, have this lack of sleep due to obstructive  sleep Apnea.  [0:08:57]  The patient pool that we're dealing with, they got to get up in the morning to get to work,  right? They haven't slept enough during whatever time they had in bed. So they almost  never would get up first thing in the morning and go for a run before work, right? That's out  of the question. So they need as much time as they can in bed to get the little sleep that  they can. Then they go to work, they work all day, stay awake at work, stay awake in the  car so they don't kill anybody on the way home. Now they get home, their ghrelin is yelling  at them to eat something. They eat something and then the last thing that they want to do  is go to the gym and work out because they just have no energy. And then this cycle just  starts over and over again. So I find it is helpful to teach your patients. This is something  else that you could just like write up in a paper or something. Bajillion things that you can  get online. You can look at these scientific articles that we have referenced throughout this  and other sessions.  [0:09:58]  But share this with your patients. This can give them a nice little, hey, there's some hope  here. And I know you've tried everything in the past, but you've had both hands tied behind  your back on this because of the hormones and the hormones reaction to your lack of  sleep. That's going to help them to be like, okay, not all my fault here. There's some bigger  forces here working against me. It's not just about my dietary choices necessarily. They  are being influenced.  09/01/25   Page   of 3   14

SSC 2.0 - 502: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 2  Short Sleep Effect on Hormones   [0:10:26]  So here's a little graphic on short sleep and its effect on various hormones and other  things going on in our body. So we have decreased leptin, increased ghrelin as we just  talked about, decreased GLP-1s. I've got a separate session on GLP-1 agonists that very  recently have been approved for treatment of obstructive sleep apnea. The theory behind  all that, again, I have a whole session on that that you can watch there. Just kind of as  some of the new things that are out by the time you watch this. It may not be that new  anymore. And who knows, maybe they aren't even using them anymore by the time you  watch this.  [0:11:05]  But I doubt that that's going to be the case. I'm pretty sure these drugs are going to be  massively popular for a long time. But GLP-1s, the reason they have been approved for  treatment of sleep apnea is because they help people lose weight. So if you have short  sleep, decreases your naturally occurring GLP-1. So the GLP-1s are agonists. They are  doing the same role as your natural GLPs, GLP-1s. So what could you do to increase your  own natural GLP-1? Well, get better sleep. This is another reason that people will tend to  lose weight, is not just the ghrelin and leptin I just talked about, but also that effect on  GLP-1s. Free fatty acids will go up, catecholamines go up, inflammation goes up, sympa -  thetic activity goes up, so stress goes up, brain activation in response to food cues all  goes up. So all of that whole column there is feeding into metabolic problems, increased  weight, and then just the whole snowball effect there of all of these different things. You  see the different arrows pointing to then insulin resistance, reduced B-cell activity, energy  homeostasis, the person has no energy, they don't feel good, then this moving over to  obesity, diabetes, metabolic disorder.  [0:12:30]  So once again, we have our insulin resistance, and you can get online and see lots of  people that are going to talk about everything being related to insulin resistance, and they  will talk about sleep as part of their thing, but is it possible that sleep is driving this?  There's a lot, a lot, a lot, a lot of stuff out there that what drives kind of everything is the  standard American diet and the poor food choices we're making, and certainly that is part  of the equation. And is that also leading to short sleep? Is that leading to obstructive sleep  apnea? Chicken or the egg, we're on the hamster wheel here. Anything we can really do to  affect that and get that hamster off the wheel is going to have a positive effect, and then  we see a lot of these things unraveling as we treat one of them. We tend to see a lot of  these things correlated.  Poor Sleep Related to Medical Conditions   [0:13:27]  09/01/25   Page   of 4   14

SSC 2.0 - 502: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 2  Nice little infographic here connecting poor sleep with all sorts of different medical condi -  tions. Notice the references down here, so we have what are sleep deprivation and defi -  ciency, and then the impact of sleep on chronic disease. This is American Medical  Women's Association, so this is more focused on women's disorders, but cardiovascular  disease, endocrine disease, obesity, neurologic issues, weak immunity, pulmonary dis -  ease, musculoskeletal pain, kidney disease, gastrointestinal issues. Okay, hence the title  for this session of Connections to Everything. That's pretty much, it's not everything, but  it's pretty much everything, and I've got more of this here too.  OSA is Associated With…   [0:14:05]  So OSA is associated with, I'm not going to read all of these things, but you, again, darn  near everything. It has been rare in my experience to search for something. So I'll have a  patient over the years that will have whatever problem, like kidney disease was one, that I  have no clue that there could be any connection with kidney disease at the time, and I go  to Google, and like, hey, kidney disease, obstructive sleep apnea, NIH. That's how I do  searches for research. Found a bunch of studies on that, and you can do that with almost  everything. It blows your mind how much research there is out there on things in kids and  adults and the correlation here. And then, of course, we know on number 16 on the list  here, dental and oral health issues, TMJ, bruxism, stuff like that, being correlated with ob -  structive sleep apnea.  “Fellow Travelers”   [0:15:07]  Now, I put in this image of people at an airport and a picture of my good friend John Rem -  mers. As I'm recording this, we recently lost John. He just passed away very recently in  July of 2025, again, as I'm recording this. And that was a sad day for all of us who knew  John well. Dr. John Remmers was one of the founding fathers of obstructive sleep apnea.  He was in the room when they were coming up with apnea poppy index. He was one of  the creators of the AutoSet CPAP machine. He was one of the creators of home sleep test -  ing. He was not a clinician. That's something a lot of people didn't know about John. He  wasn't actually a clinician. He was an MD, but he was a researcher. He was a pulmonolo -  gist researcher. And he was the epitome of a scientist. It was extremely rare for John to  give you his opinion on anything. He would basically say, well, the evidence says this. And  then if it was his opinion, he would go out of his way to say, I don't know about this, but  here's what I think about this. There's no evidence to support this other than my observa -  tions and talking to others who are clinicians.  [0:16:31]  09/01/25   Page   of 5   14

SSC 2.0 - 502: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 2  But here's what I'm thinking on this. And he was very, very good at that. But he would say  this phrase. I probably was blessed to hear Dr. Remmers speak more than anybody else in  the world, I bet. I don't know who would have had the opportunity to hear him speak more  than me. Why that was is I started a program at Tufts University a long time ago. He was  one of our faculty members. And so I heard him every time that he spoke at our test pro -  gram. Then a few years ago, Dr., well, he is a doctor, but Colonel Philip Neal started a  program in the Army that he had me basically lead that program, and Dr. Remmers was  one of our faculty there as well, and John would come for the entire five-day program  every time, and I would hear him speak there as well. And then I've heard him at other  things, and he's been on our Zoom meeting multiple times. You can go back and look at  his lectures in the archives, and I would strongly encourage you to do so, because  whether he said it five years ago or more recently, it's going to be true.  [0:17:37]  That's just the way John was. So he would use this term fellow travelers. He would not, as  dentists, we want to be, hey, this is it. This is causal. Obstructive sleep apnea makes you  grind your teeth. And if you're not breathing through your nose and you got no nitric oxide  or whatever, like dentists will tend to go to extremes on stuff and just be like, yeah, this is  it, black or white, and that's the way it is. And that tends to be because our knowledge is  pretty shallow. That's why. So people who go to this is what it all is, it's usually because  they don't know that much. So when you hear that, when you have someone lecturing and  they're like, yeah, this causes this, it's like, hmm, does it? That's kind of like, there's a huge  correlation between ice cream sales and shark attacks. Ice cream sales directly correlated  with shark attacks in Australia. So really probably the smart thing to do is we should just  not allow ice cream to be sold in the summer in Australia, and that would reduce the shark  attacks. No, those have nothing to do with each other.  [0:18:41]  The only reason that is is because ice cream is sold in the summer, more people in the  water in the summer, sharks are in the water all the time, now there's people to eat when  it's summertime, that's the correlation, those are sort of fellow travelers in that area there.  That's what John would call all of these different problems. So he would give you the same  type of lecture I'm giving you now with OSA and its connection to all of these different  things, but then quickly remind us that it doesn't mean that OSA causes any of these  things. It's just that they're fellow travelers. As I've said before, with these fellow travelers,  if we tend to kind of pick one or a few that seem to be the biggest problems, we tend to  see these other fellow travelers along for the ride get better as well. This is why you can  have people with different techniques, different approaches, a metabolic approach versus  an anatomical approach versus a more medical mindset with medications, whatever, you  can see people coming at these problems with different approaches and having success,  even though they may ignore the thing that you're passionate about, the patient can still  get better.  [0:19:53]  09/01/25   Page   of 6   14

SSC 2.0 - 502: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 2  This can be confusing, but this is the advantage of you having that connections that I'm  always talking about in your medical community, because you can share with each other  and help them to see, be like, okay, yeah, this person isn't getting better. Well, maybe it's  because their airway is not patent. What do you think their brain cares more about, the  hormone deficiency that you're dealing with or air? And they'll be like, oh, yeah, that's  probably true. Okay, so fellow travelers, remember that.  OSA Induces..   [0:20:17]  So this is a bit of an involved and complicated infographic here, but now we're going to get  down into more our stuff here of obstructive sleep apnea, and really our stuff, because  starting at the very top here is airway size. So this is more of a anatomical approach to ob -  structive sleep apnea that we're talking about airway size. So decrease in airway size or  the obstruction of the airway, resistance and collapsibility of upper airway. So it's that resis -  tance when we're breathing in. So all apnea happens breathing in. As we have that low  pressure system and that allows the collapse of the airway. So I'm not going to go step by  step through this infographic here, but this is one I would encourage you to pause and to  go through all of these different pathways. And all of the different things, again, like most of  us. Us, and if you are watching this video, it means you like my teaching style. I tend to,  and I would say almost have a gift for making complicated things simple.  [0:21:26]  Now, some people may say I make complicated things simplistic. And that could be true. I  would take that argument. Once again, I'm an 80-20 kind of guy. So when we have a lot of  stuff involved, I'm going to kind of narrow down this top part to it's the airway collapsibility.  So with oral appliance therapy, I can make it so they can't collapse the airway. And then  the rest of this stuff kind of doesn't matter. With the intermittent hypoxia and that kind of  starting this whole cascade of events, I'm going to say, well, if I can keep their airway  open, then I'm not going to go down that cascade in the first place. And all of that would be  true. Now, that doesn't mean that it's not helpful for us to understand all of the different  things that are going on and the effect on the Vagus nerve and all sorts of different things  that are going on with obstructive sleep apnea. But this is the Pareto principle here that if  we can get rid of the 20%, which is the obstruction of the airway, the ability of the airway to  obstruct, if we can make it not obstruct, then we're not going to have the 80% of the nega -  tive effect cascade.  [0:22:38]  So I'll make that graphic a little bit bigger for you there so it's easier for you to make a  screen capture. So there's kind of the top part on the airway size and also, interesting  things here with fluid accumulation in the airway and adipose soft tissue deposition. We  also know there's adipose soft tissue deposition in the tongue and this is one of the rea -  sons that a relatively modest weight loss can make a pretty big difference in sleep apnea.  09/01/25   Page   of 7   14

SSC 2.0 - 502: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 2  Going down to the bottom part of it here is that whole pathway with the hypoxemia and  hypercapnia and the things like that that are affected that result in the collapse of the air -  way, the critical closing pressure, things like that.  OSA Effect on Brain   [0:23:18]  Well, what about obstructive sleep apnea's effect on our brain itself? So here's another in -  fographic that you can capture and maybe kind of spend some time going through this and  you see how obstructive sleep apnea seems to start off this entire cascade which at the  end of the day leads to neurocognitive dysfunction or just, poor brain function at the mini -  mum of like poor memory consolidation and things like that and at the other end of it are  things like Alzheimer's disease and neurocognitive breakdown and dysfunction over time.  OSA Effect on Insulin Resistance   [0:23:58]  How about obstructive sleep apnea's effect on insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes, dyslipi -  demia? Well, here's the pathway for that and obstructive sleep apnea at the top causing  sleep fragmentation, recurrent nocturnal arousals, going into inflammation, all sorts of fac -  tors going on here ultimately down to a decreased glucose uptake, decreased insulin se -  cretion, increased glucagon secretion, pancreatic B cell dysfunction, impaired glucose dis -  posal and other things there, increase of your total cholesterol, triglycerides, all of the kind  of the so-called bad cholesterols and things like that going on, all of this leading down.  Now again, you could take this same infographic and there's going to be different people  that put different stuff here at the top but this is just again from research saying that people  with this tend to have all of this other stuff. Causal or fellow travelers, not sure.  OSA and Cancer   [0:25:00]  What about cancer? So in this infographic we have obstructive sleep apnea at the center  here and then the effects ringing out from that into tumor cell growth, angiogenesis into  those areas, tumor-associated inflammatory mediators, et cetera. All with obstructive sleep  apnea at the center. Causal or fellow travelers?  OSA Neurocognitive Consequences   [0:25:25]  Obstructive sleep apnea's neurocognitive consequences, attention and vigilance de -  creased, memory and learning decreased, executive function, psychomotor function, emo -  09/01/25   Page   of 8   14

SSC 2.0 - 502: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 2  tional regulation, decreased quality of life overall. That just sort of makes sense for us but  we recognize this whole cascade of events associated with not just lack of sleep but ob -  structive sleep apnea in itself. And these neurocognitive consequences don't just include  the feeling tired and things like that but also can be increased risk for automobile and oc -  cupational accidents of course leading to harm to the patient themselves or to those  around them or to those who just happen to be driving on the road at the same time that  they fall asleep at the wheel.  What Contributes to OSA?   [0:26:08]  Now of course we can't forget our fellow travelers from the other direction so to speak of  what things tend to contribute to OSA and put people at greater risk other than just our  classic being a fat old man. So medications, medical conditions, alcohol and smoking, ge -  netic and family history, facial structure abnormalities, genetic conditions, hormonal  changes, enlarged tonsils and adenoids. Here's another big list of things that OSA is asso -  ciated with. I won't read all of these to you but I will point out one that I put in all caps on  here, sleep deprived bed partners. This is one of the things that really gets concerning  about obstructive sleep apnea.  [0:26:54]  If all the other things that I haven't told you already aren't concerning enough, keep in mind  what I refer to as secondhand sleep apnea. So we've made a pretty good case in this ses -  sion about short sleep causing these problems, insufficient sleep, lack of sleep, poor  sleep. Yes, you and I are focused more on the obstructive sleep apnea but all of these  things can be said of just lack of sleep, poor sleep in general. Well, if someone with ob -  structive sleep apnea has a bed partner, that bed partner, and it has been shown, the  classic study at Mayo Clinic from 98, I believe, where they had the 10 couples all studied  at the same time, the guys had sleep apnea and their wives, all of these married couples  in this study, all showed to have disrupted sleep. So with this secondhand sleep apnea,  what percentage of people with secondhand sleep apnea have all of these other medical  conditions that we've talked about in this session? How often are those caught? Think  about this in your own life. If you've ever had any of the medical conditions or you have  any of the medical conditions that we've talked about in this session, has your doctor ever  asked you, does your bed partner snore?  [0:28:22]  I'll bet you, you've never been asked that question. So maybe we can be the ones that ask  that question. When we see our patients, if you are a restorative dentist and you are doing  a health history with a patient, you're going through stuff, you see the medications are on,  rather than just doing kind of our typical like, okay, so you're on this, you know, beta block,  you're on this medication, okay, shouldn't be a problem with the crown prep I'm going to do  here. I know that this would cause a massive disturbance in your practice because we're  09/01/25   Page   of 9   14

SSC 2.0 - 502: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 2  used to going over that stuff really quick and just being like, okay, good, none of that ap -  plies to why you're here right now. But maybe if we started actually looking a little bit and  you ask those patients, hey, and maybe it's, and we don't have time to talk about this in  depth right now, but I see you're on this, this, this, this, and this. Do you snore? Has any -  one ever told you to stop breathing when you sleep? Okay, do the screening, right? So you  may have sleep apnea, snoring, obstructions. Okay, that's the so part. And when they say,  “no, I don’t", right now you would probably be prone to just moving on again, going back  into dentist mode of like, okay, well, none of that stuff's going to affect me giving you a shot  or anything. So I think we're cool.  [0:29:45]  But before you just move on, just say curious. So you don't snore. You don't stop breathing  when you sleep. Bed partner? That's all you'd have to say. You could say it literally like  that. You don't snore. You don't stop breathing when you sleep. Bed partner? And if they're  like, well, “yeah, you know, he snores like crazy”. Okay, that might be worth getting that  person back and maybe with their snoring and obstructive sleep apnea bed partner. And  maybe you treat them and then you watch to see how they do. I'm not aware of any stud -  ies other than that Mayo Clinic study, which is a really cool one. I'm not aware, and this  would be kind of a unique study if this has ever been done, of checking on the health of  bed partners, family members for that matter, of people treated with obstructive sleep ap -  nea. But as we think about everything we're going over in this session here, it makes  sense, doesn't it? It's not necessarily the cause of the lack of sleep and the poor sleep that  is the reason that this person is having all of these things. What I mean by that, it's not the  narrow airway that then causes the insulin resistance.  [0:31:13]  It's the narrow airway being collapsible leading to sleep apnea, leading to sleep fragmenta -  tion and poor sleep, then starting that whole cascade. So what if the person has entered  into that cascade with just the sleep fragmentation due to bed partner snoring and sleep  apnea? Well, it stands to reason that a lot of these health issues would be in them too. But  again, we've got the whole list here of all the things associated with obstructive sleep ap -  nea.  Our Job…   [0:31:48]  So to end this portion here, wouldn't it be nice if all of the problems that we just went over,  as well as even the secondhand sleep apnea potential problems, if all of that could go  away if we blew air up somebody's face or stuck a thing in their mouth? Wouldn't that be  awesome? Well, unfortunately, these are fellow travelers. This is not cause and effect. But  what does your brain care more about? Air or a good night's sleep? Well, probably air. So  we are engaged in this really important 20% that creates 80% type of principle many,  many, many, many times. So it is possible and is not only possible, but it's probable that for  09/01/25   Page   of 10   14

SSC 2.0 - 502: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 2  many of your patients, you will treat them with an oral appliance or for many of your dental  patients, you'll refer them for sleep evaluations. They'll get tested for sleep apnea. They  will be diagnosed with sleep apnea. They will be placed on CPAP and all sorts of health  problems that they have been struggling with.  [0:33:11]  Will get better or even completely resolve. You will see this. This is the addictive part of  treating patients with OSA is the results can be so amazing and you can't always predict  what all positive is going to happen. That seems not necessarily directly correlated or di -  rectly related to the obstructive sleep apnea. On the flip side of that coin, just because we  protect the airway doesn't mean that all of these health issues are just going to go away  because some of them are not actually related to the sleep apnea. They are related to  other things. You need to recognize that not everything is always causal, that it's awesome  when it is causal and we can get to that etiology and treat it. But then when it's not, that we  know the next steps. With most of this session, this has been focused on medical prob -  lems that we don't tend to treat. But of course, one of these things that we do treat is brux -  ism. And if you have somebody who has evidence of bruxism, they may be aware of  clenching and grinding their teeth day or night, you treat them with oral appliance therapy,  and they continue to clench and grind their teeth.  [0:34:43]  You send them back to the doc, we do a follow-up sleep study, you know it's working, as in  the airway's protected, it's doing its job, yet they continue to clench and grind their teeth,  that's when we then jump into, okay, could it be your medications? Could it be emotional  stress? Could it be this? Could it be that? Could it be that? We don't just stop with, oh,  well, either, sorry, there's nothing I can do for you, or what most dentists will do, especially  if they're more beginners in this field, is they will think it is all about the oral appliance, and  that if the person isn't 100% cured, it's probably because they suck as a dentist and didn't  do a good job with the oral appliance, they chose the wrong oral appliance, they don't got  the vertical right, they don't have the AP right, whatever, that's usually not the case.  Research Shows   [0:35:28]  And finally, some other positives of sleep here, research shows that sleep may flush toxins  from the brain, this has been known for over a decade now, help consolidate new learning  into memory, boost athletic performance, help us miss less work due to sickness, help with  weight loss, and a whole bunch more stuff. So in 2025, as I'm recording this, again, you  cannot listen to a podcast, watch something on YouTube about health, where sleep's not  going to get mentioned, it's ubiquitous, it is everywhere. And unfortunately, sleep disorders  are everywhere, and poor sleep is everywhere, and lack of sleep is everywhere. Some -  times when I'm teaching at different courses and things like that, let's say that I'm teaching  and it's a course that has been marketed to people all over the country, and I'll have peo -  09/01/25   Page   of 11   14

SSC 2.0 - 502: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 2  ple attend the course and I'm going around the room maybe and they're introducing them -  selves, saying why they want to be there, maybe you had this experience. And I'll have  people in these courses that are from Utah or Idaho, and specifically they're from the Salt  Lake area or the Boise, Idaho area. And sometimes I'll joke and be like, oh, okay, well,  you're from Boise? All right, I can't really talk to you. Just the other day, I had that happen  where a dentist kind of reached out, said, hey, do you know anyone in this part of Utah that  could help me learn more about dental sleep medicine and stuff like that?  [0:37:08]  And I'm like, oh, well, you know my practice is here, so I really can't help you. You're my  competition. And then I said, just kidding. I don't view any of us as competition. There are  so many people for us to help that many, many people in Spencer Study Club have com -  pletely limited their practice to only dental sleep medicine and TMD. And there's a few  people in Spencer Study Club that I haven't influenced hard enough yet that just do dental  sleep medicine. I try to get everyone who's doing dental sleep medicine to do TMD for var -  ious reasons, like I covered in level 4 there, it's just kind of safer. TMD is a little bit less  likely to be completely focused on insurance. People that are in pain tend to want to get  out of pain. So if you right now are doing no TMD at all, I strongly encourage you to learn  more about that. But with sleep by itself, there's plenty of people out there that have com -  pletely limited practices and they're doing fine. As a matter of fact, within Spencer Study  Club, we have our business elite group, our mastermind group, and the number one prob -  lem that our members of our business elite group have is not seeing all the patients that  they're referred already.  [0:38:40]  Now that's not necessarily their fault typically, but it's what I mean by that is, and we've  seen this in our practice, that literally every year we have hundreds of patients, hundreds  of patients a year referred to us that we never get into our office. And that's not for lack of  trying. We have one person in our office, that's her entire job is to handle the referrals that  we get, try to get those patients in and try to get them in for annual follow-ups too for peo -  ple that are already in treatment. That's all she does. And that's astounding that a practice  like ours has that issue. And then I've seen this all over the country. Well when I do the  math though of the number of people in the Boise area who are put on CPAP and then the  percentage, you kind of do the math there of like, all right, well how many people are put  on CPAP and what percentage of those are probably using their CPAP six months to a  year from now? And you know all the stats, right? If you do that in your area too, I guaran -  tee you, even if you've got a practice like mine, that you're only seeing a fraction of the  people that are CPAP intolerant in your area.  [0:39:54]  Just a fraction of them. And then think of all the people out there that are not diagnosed.  Almost all of the disorders that we just talked about that are related or co-travelers with  OSA, The vast majority of doctors that treat those disorders don't even know anything  about obstructive sleep apnea. Or they know in general, right? This is why I will often say if  you're lucky enough to be a fat old man, then the doctor is going to consider obstructive  09/01/25   Page   of 12   14

SSC 2.0 - 502: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 2  sleep apnea with your kidney disease, your metabolic disorder, your insulin resistance,  your whatever it is. But if you're not lucky enough to be a fat old man, then they aren't. This  is where we come in. This is where you come in in your local community, is you can be of  impact there. You can be of influence. You can help get these people diagnosed and treat -  ed appropriately and make a massive impact with ripple effects that will go on for genera -  tions. Okay, so that is our portion here on obstructive sleep apnea's connection to seem -  ingly everything. This only gets more over time. One of the values of being a member of  Spencer Study Club is our monthly Zoom meetings.  [0:41:18]  And in those, we often talk about some of the new stuff that's out there. And I can't always  be coming back in and updating everything in Spencer Study Club, but that's what our  monthly Zoom meetings are for. So as a member of Spencer Study Club, you will always  be at the tip of the spear when it comes to obstructive sleep apnea and what's going on in  the field and what things are related. And you'll have experts come in from other fields and  talk to you about that and what we can do to help more of our patients. You'll always be on  the cutting edge of that as well as, not just that area, but knowing from your hundreds of  other colleagues in Spencer Study Club what things they are finding, questions that they  ask. You'll always be in the know on stuff like that. Spencer Study Club members tend to  know first before any of their colleagues in the country. And also, because I tend to attract  other people that think like I do with more abundance, that we're not in competition with  each other, members of Spencer Study Club aren't typically scared of sharing something  with their colleagues that like, oh, I'm going to share my secret sauce with you and you're  going to compete against me.  [0:42:32]  That doesn't tend to be how it is either. So you're in the right place. And I hope that this  session helps you and helps your family members. And just remember as you're kind of  going through life here and you and family members have an issue, yeah, wouldn't it be  awesome if it was sleep apnea and you could blow air up their face or stick a thing in their  mouth and that would cure their problem? That would be awesome. It isn't always the  case, but it's often the case. And my recommendation to you is if you've got a child or a  kid, you know, a spouse or a parent or a brother or sister or whatever it is, and they've got  some sort of problem and you think they may have sleep apnea, treat them. Get scans,  get an appliance in their mouth. You're not going to hurt them. Try and you should know  pretty quick if it's going to have a positive impact or not. And if it does have a positive im -  pact, then maybe you go down that road officially. Maybe you get them into the sleep doc -  tor, you get a sleep study, you get all that stuff.  [0:43:33]  But if this is a loved one, just treat them. And that's the beauty of what we do with oral ap -  pliance therapy is the potential side effects are so minimal that we can just start and we  know that we're not going to hurt them with oral appliance therapy. That if they kind of al -  most the worst case scenario is it doesn't help them and then, you know, we could take  that treatment away. If it helps them, then that just means, all right, there's something  09/01/25   Page   of 13   14

SSC 2.0 - 502: Obstructive Sleep Apnea and its Connection to Almost Everything Part 2  anatomical going on here. Now let's get to the bottom of it. Okay, I hope that helps you see  the connections with everything. I hope that you will take this as a springboard jumping off  point and not just as like, all right, you know, now I know everything about this stuff, but an  area that anything that you're kind of thinking about, you can be like, all right, that thing  and obstructive sleep apnea. What is the connection there? Promise you'll learn more as  time goes on and as you have these patients that God will send you that are unique cases  and tough cases. That's kind of the fun part as you see it's like, okay, never heard anyone  talk about this before. Let me do a Google search. I'll be darned if there's not a paper on  that. Let's see what happens here. Let's treat this person and wow, okay, that helped them  or shoot, it didn't in this case, but at least I tried. At least I knew what I was supposed to  look for. All right, take care.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 14   14

