SSC 2.0 - 503: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 1  SSC 2.0   Level 5  503: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 1  [intro music]  Your Best Sleep!   [0:00:12]  Welcome to, Your Best Sleep. Sleep hacks for you, your family, your friends, your patients,  everybody you know, and "hacks" in quotes there 'cause these really aren't hacks. These  are things that you must do in order to get a great night's sleep and things that you can  help all those around you, including your patients. Now I've gone through sleep hygiene  stuff in other levels, in the level one levels. I talk about sleep hygiene. We're going to re-  address those things and go a little bit more into depth on each of those points and also  look at some of the literature on these things so that you have some evidence, literature-  based evidence that you can share with patients if you'd like to or just for your own knowl -  edge. So let's jump in here to, Your Best Sleep.  Sleep Hygiene   [0:01:05]  Now you hopefully remember my sleep hygiene acronym that is easy to remember 'cause  it spells sleep. Sleepy time, lights, environment, exercise, and priority. That is it. Let's go  through those one at a time here.  S - Sleepy Time   [0:01:22]  So first is S, sleepy time. Sleep the same time each day, wind down, give yourself time to  sleep. If you have already gone through the OSA's connections to seemingly everything,  we talk in there about lack of sleep and short sleep, and this is part of that. So not just the  bedtime part, but giving yourself enough time to sleep. How much time do you need?  Have you figured that out yet? In that OSA's connection to everything, I talk about that,  how you can do that, so you can go back and watch that in a nutshell. You just need to go  to bed at the same time, make sure you've got more than enough time to sleep, and after  you've paid back your sleep debt, after three, four nights, you will then start to see when  you naturally wake up. Once you know that, then you can accommodate that accordingly  with your bedtime and making sure that you have enough time for sleep. This is sleepy  time, very critical. Here is a relatively recent article, and you will maybe notice a name on  09/01/25   Page   of 1   11

SSC 2.0 - 503: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 1  this article, which is our friend Noah Siegel. And this is sleep physiology, pathophysiology,  and sleep hygiene. These things on sleep hygiene have been known for a very, very long  time. Probably your grandmother knew all of this stuff, but I like seeing this in the more up-  to-date literature as well. So some quotes from that report. Going to sleep and waking up  at the same time each day, including on weekends and during travel, is perhaps the most  important aspect of sleep hygiene.  [0:02:53]  Now, as one of the authors on this study, Dr. Siegel, and I know him quite well, and he is  really good at practicing what he preaches. He is very good at early to bed, early to rise.  Now, he's a surgeon. He's an ear, nose, and throat surgeon, sleep doctor, so he does have  to round on patients, goes to the OR early in the mornings, things like that. But he has re -  ally focused a lot on this sleep time, sleep schedule, giving himself enough time for sleep.  He practices what he preaches for sure. A regular sleep schedule helps maintain the  body's internal clocks, reduces daytime sleepiness, allows people to fall asleep and wake  up more easily. Furthermore, aligning with our body's internal circadian rhythm helps opti -  mize our mental health, endocrine system, and reproductive system. As with OSA's con -  nections to everything, we know that proper sleep affects dang near every health aspect of  our life, including not just physical health, but also our mental health.  L- Lights   [0:03:53]  Next, L for lights. Dim the lights to signal your brain it's time to rest. Avoid using electronic  devices for at least 30 minutes prior to bedtime, minimize blue light exposure. So in this  study, they looked at light exposure before sleep and during sleep, and we kind of know  intuitively that any light exposure during sleep is gonna screw up your sleep. But what they  found was that, limiting light exposure in that hour preceding sleep and then obviously dur -  ing sleep is related to better sleep health. They found, reading here directly, results  demonstrated that greater average light exposure and time above light threshold during  sleep was related to later sleep onset, taking longer to go to sleep, and poorer sleep conti -  nuity. Really any light exposure at all is going to signal your brain, it's like, “oh, sun's rising,  better start that wake-up cycle”.  [0:04:53]  Authors continue to say here, results from the study provide further evidence that multi-  level sleep health interventions that reduce light exposure during the sleep period are  needed. At an individual level, interventions that aim to reduce light exposure during the  sleep period could improve sleep health. Again, seems pretty obvious, but in today's world  of people charging their devices and stuff like that, a lot of these things have LEDs on  them, and there's, you go to a hotel even, and they have the alarm clock there, and I don't  know about you, but I will either try to make the room as dark as possible, or when I travel,  and actually even at our home, I have a sleep mask.  09/01/25   Page   of 2   11

SSC 2.0 - 503: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 1  [0:05:33]  I'll use a sleep mask very often when I travel, and in our new home in Puerto Rico where  we live, we don't yet have in the bedroom there blackout shades, and it gets light quite  early in Puerto Rico. It's in the Atlantic Time Zone. In the summer, it shares, Atlantic Time  Zone doesn't change. Daylight saving time. That's not a thing that they do there. So in the  summertime, it's the same as East Coast time. And it's so, even though it's way farther  East than the East Coast. So therefore, gets light really early. So having something to  block out that light is really important, 'cause as soon as that room gets filled with light,  your brain is starting into wake up mode. So consider that. It's pretty amazing how big of a  difference a very inexpensive sleep mask can make. Speaking of that, that may be some -  thing that you consider as a little bit of a marketing tool or as something just as a bonus to  your patients, is see if you can't get some branded or even non-branded sleep mask and  good quality. Not the little rinky dink cheap things that you get on a flight to Europe or  something like that.  [0:06:51]  Not something that they would never wanna use, but something very, very comfortable.  You and your staff can use these. We've done things like this as gifts to referring doctors  that you put a package together for all of their team to help them with their sleep. And that  can be really, really well received. These things don't cost that much, especially if you buy  them in massive bulk and can make a huge difference on that patient's sleep. So I would  strongly consider you making that part of your package when people start treatment with  you, that you could actually give them a sleep mask that's very, very comfortable. Say, hey,  try this a little bit, see if it helps you.  Blue-Light Blocking Glasses   [0:07:29]  There's also blue blocking glasses. This is just one brand, but there's one of the kind of  original blue blockers for people that work on computers. But it's not just for people to work  on computers. It's kind of for everybody. So my wife and I, we have multiple pairs of blue  blocking glasses. And particularly in the winter when we live in Utah, in the winter it gets  dark pretty early. But of course, then we're indoors with a bunch of light. And so, even  though it's dark outside, it's 6:30, let's say, we're inside surrounded by artificial lighting.  And to wear those blue blocking glasses when you're around all this artificial light, can re -  ally make a big difference with your sleep. So this is something you can consider. Nowa -  days they don't have this massive yellow tint to them normally. And you can get all sorts of  brands have these. You could get reading glasses that have blue blocking in them. You  can get all sorts of stuff with this.  [0:08:32]  09/01/25   Page   of 3   11

SSC 2.0 - 503: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 1  Try it. That can be something you can do. If you can't avoid being on your computer before  bedtime and things like that outright, then this would be the next best thing is to use these  types of glasses.  Device “Blue Light Filter”   [0:08:44]  Speaking of your computer, your iPad, your laptop, your phone, virtually all devices nowa -  days will have a Night Shift or Blue Light Filter on them. So Night Shift is the Apple version.  Androids are Blue Light Filter. I'm sure that your PCs and stuff have something similar.  Make sure that's on. If you don't know if your device already has this turned on, how you  would know is when the sun goes down tonight, does the screen turn yellowish? If it does,  then that's the Blue Light Filter that has been turned on. If you're like, I don't know what  you're talking about, Jamison, and I've never noticed my screen changing when it's night -  time, then you probably don't have that on. And that means you're getting a big dose of  blue light. The big problem with this, if this isn't just completely obvious, is as we're flood -  ing our retinas with light, and then we hope to just turn that off and turn off our light switch  and be like, okay, brain, now go to sleep. Turn off and immediately go to sleep. That's not  realistic. So we've not really been put together that way. If you go outside, if you ever go  camping or if you see a sunset at some point, you're going to notice that it gets dark grad -  ually and not just all at once. It's not just a light switch type of effect. It gets dark gradually,  gets darker and darker, and then it's eventually dark, and that happens over a period of  time. So this is if you could create this same sort of sunset in your daily life, you're going to  benefit from that.  [0:10:34]  I know a few sleep researchers. There's one doctor I know that he and his wife are both  PhDs and sleep researchers, and so they take this stuff very, very seriously in their family.  And so, they have no electronics or anything like that after like 6:30 at night, 7 O'clock at  night. The last hour or so, it's just like reading lights, more or less darkish environment with  just some reading lights, and they're reading what he refers to as thinly sliced trees, or in  other words, paper books. And that's what they do. And then they don't have any electron -  ics in the bedroom or any of that kind of stuff. Again, he takes the sleep hygiene stuff very,  very, very seriously. This is a little thing you can do. Once again, remember to tell your pa -  tients about this. They may not know. And your teenage patients, well, and even all of us  adults too, let's be real here. It is not uncommon at all for myself, even knowing about all  this stuff, to maybe have a YouTube video on or something like that before I'm going to  bed. Now, probably don't have it one inch from my face or something like that, but this  does have an impact on your sleep. Try to avoid that light.  [0:11:51]  Now, I didn't put this in here. This is in a different level where I talk about red light. It's in  level three that I talk about red light and it's effect on sleep. So you can go back and watch  09/01/25   Page   of 4   11

SSC 2.0 - 503: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 1  that in level three, but just to kind of put it in here, red light has been shown to help sleep.  Now, Dr. Desai, who's one of my friends, who's an expert in red light therapy, the way he  uses it is he does his evening red light therapy about an hour before bed and believes that  that is helpful for his sleep. He doesn't think that it's ideal. I don't know that we have a ton  of evidence on this, but at least for him personally, it's not ideal to do it right before bed.  My wife and I will use red light pretty darn close to bedtime, does seem to help. Many oth -  er people in Spencer Study Club have anecdotally told me that using red light has helped  them tremendously with their sleep as well. So it's not all light. It's the different wave -  lengths of light and red light seems to be helpful. Blue light seems to be harmful.  E- Environment   [0:12:52]  Next is E for environment. And in my original level one version of this discussion, I have for  E environment, I have three things. I have quiet, dark. We just talked about light. And then,  I have a picture of a thermostat. And on the thermostat, you may have been with me in a  lecture where I did this live, and I'll say, what does that indicate? And I'm not saying, does  that mean cool or warm? I'm just saying, what does that indicate, the thermostat there?  And the vast majority of people will say, cool, a cool environment. And then I'll say, okay,  awesome. And for those of you who just said a cool or even cold environment, how many  of you have bed partners that like a warmish environment? And it's amazing how many  people will raise their hands. So on this one, we're just going to talk about the temperature  of the environment right now. So on temperature, this study here discusses that the most  efficient and restful sleep seemed to be when temperatures were between 20 and 25 de -  grees Celsius. That's 68 degrees Fahrenheit to 77 degrees.  [0:14:03]  Now, me saying 77 degrees, you're like, whoa, that's really, really warm. I don't think I  could possibly sleep at 77 degrees. I think you're right. So I don't think I could either, but  there will be some variability of this. And depending on what you're used to and where you  live, and even humidity is going to affect that. So 68 is closer to where I'm comfortable.  And we're gonna talk about how to make that even cooler in just a second. But that's what  this study showed. Says, clinically relevant 5-10% drop in sleep efficiency when the tem -  perature increase from 25 or 77 degrees to over 30 degrees Celsius, which would be in  the 80s. Agreed. Now you may, back when you were poor, you may remember going on a  trip to Mexico or something like that, and being in an environment where it was hot, maybe  the air conditioning. I've been in this relatively recently. A few years ago, we went to a nice  resort and I had to have them come in multiple times. I'm like, the air conditioning is not  working. And it would be set at like 68.  [0:15:10]  And I'm like, okay, there's no way it's 68. It's more like 78. And they would come in with this  thermometer deal and test the air right at the vent and show me. And they're like, no, see  09/01/25   Page   of 5   11

SSC 2.0 - 503: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 1  look, at the vent, it's 68. I'm like, no, I get that, but move a couple feet away from it. And  then I would have them check. And indeed, it was in the upper 70s. That was really hard  for me to sleep 'cause I'm used to a cooler environment. Reading back from this study, the  associations were primarily nonlinear and substantial between subject variations were ob -  served. In other words, this varied from person to person on what was most comfortable  and best for them. These results highlight the potential to enhance sleep quality in older  adults by optimizing home thermal environments and emphasize the importance of per -  sonalized temperature adjustments based on individual needs and circumstances. Now,  historically, that means that the person who likes it cold gets to be in charge of the air con -  ditioning or the thermostat in the winter and keeping the heat down. And the person who  likes it warmer gets more blankets.  Bed Temperature Control   [0:16:21]  But good news, now we have dual zone climate control for the bed. I think my wife and I  have had this now for probably a decade. We started off with Chilipad and then they creat -  ed something called the Ooler. That eventually kind of broke on me, which is unfortunate  'cause these things are kind of expensive. We have a split king and then you buy one for  each side, but you can do this with a queen size bed. You can do this with a non-split king.  And they make these where it's each side of the bed. The person has control over the  temperature of their bed. And you see here kind of this image that we have. It's something  you put underneath your fitted sheet and you can't feel it. The Chilipad and the Eight Sleep  are water cooled. BedJet is air. If you are considering getting something like this, which I  strongly encourage you to do, the water-cooled ones are more expensive, but they're also  way better. They're way more effective. The range of temperatures that you can create  with the water cooling versus air is dramatic. So I believe there are systems now that will  take it down to 50 degrees, which would be very, very, very cold, and over 100 degrees.  [0:17:48]  The joke I use when you've seen me lecture this in person is like the Chilipad will go from  55 degrees on the cold side, to 115 degrees on the warm side if you like your bed partner  medium rare. So most of the time, most people are gonna be in that 65-ish to maybe 72-  ish if they really like it warm. That'd be on the warm side of things. Right now with my  Chilipad version, the Ooler version, I'm at 66 on my side of the bed. And Jenny and I just  recently bought a Eight Sleep, and we're excited to get that installed. That's gonna go to  our place in Puerto Rico. And the cool thing with Eight Sleep, and this is the first one, I be -  lieve, to have this technology. Perhaps by the time you're watching this video, there will be  many of these on the market. I hope there are, 'cause that'll help the price come down.  Right now, most of these things are quite expensive. So the Eight Sleep system is thou -  sands of dollars, but it incorporates the cooling heating pad with tracking, sleep tracking on  it's own.  09/01/25   Page   of 6   11

SSC 2.0 - 503: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 1  [0:18:58]  So this isn't some wearable that you have to have, but the mattress pad itself is able to  measure your body temperature, basically everything that my Garmin watch will do and  whatnot, the mattress pad itself will do. You can then, so because I do this for a living and  take sleep and sleep hygiene very, very seriously, my wife and I got kind of the ultimate  system that you could have there. And so, it has a system too, that it will raise the head of  the bed if any snoring is detected. It will change the temperature. And my friends in  Spencer Study Club who already have the Eight Sleep, and there's multiples of them, have  told me that it's been a total game changer for them. One story, that the Spencer Study  Club member, his wife, who would describe herself as being very, very frugal, bordering on  cheap, was like, wow, that's a ton of money, but they've got a pretty good return policy on  it.  [0:20:01]  So let's give it a whirl and see. And now she's like, you would not get this away from me for  anything. This is one of the most important investments that she feels that she's ever  made in her health is the Chilipad. And part of that, and this woman I'm talking about is a  little younger than this, but there's good evidence that for women in menopause, peri -  menopause, that start having hot flashes and whatnot, that using the cooling mattress pad  can dramatically reduce their hot flashes during the day as well. So that's fascinating. So  just having this improvement of your sleep at night, carrying on into the day. So really, real -  ly look into that. This is, again, not a minor investment for you, but if I were you, and doing  this for a living, by the way, you could write this off. This is absolutely a business expense  for you to buy this for your house so that you can talk to your patients about it, so that you  practice what you preach, that you are doing everything you can to have the best night's  sleep possible. And this is something that is just absolutely amazing. More and more com -  panies coming up with this. I think when I got the Chilipad, I think that was one of the first  ones. And then, some of these air ones came on the market. Again, they're very inexpen -  sive, the air ones, but they just don't work very well.  [0:21:29]  So if it's just within a few degrees, the air works great. But if you want that bigger swing,  also the Eight Sleep. So the system that we just got now has a incorporated top sheet as  well. So you are in cons, in this enveloped into that temperature. We'll see how that goes.  There are some people that will make a case for sleeping on something cold and then  having the warmth on top of you. These would be kind of your primal type of people say -  ing, well, back in the caveman times, you were sleeping on the ground and the ground  would be a relatively consistent temperature being ground and all. And then you might  have your buffalo hides on top of you. And that would be something that we adapted to or  whatever over time. We'll see. So I'll let you know. You could ask me if you see me some -  thing, hey, how's that going with the Eight Sleep system? I'm sure I'll still have it. Or again,  maybe moved on to something better by then. But we did go full on. And I would suggest  you do too. Just go ahead and make that investment because, as the mattress salesper -  09/01/25   Page   of 7   11

SSC 2.0 - 503: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 1  son will tell you, you spend a third of your life in bed for sleep. You might as well get the  most out of it.  E- Exercise   [0:22:45]  The next E is for exercise and daily exercise or appropriate amounts of exercise helping  you with your sleep. So this systematic review looked at the effect of physical activity on  sleep quality. Some quotes from that, regular physical activity can lead to improved sleep  quality, reduce sleep latency, going to sleep faster, better overall sleep quality. Moreover,  physical activity has shown promise in managing sleep disorders like insomnia. That's  cool. Regular moderate intensity physical activities are the most effective, while high inten -  sity physical activities, especially in the evening or close to bedtime, may lead to difficulty  sleeping. Now, the may on there means, so it doesn't say will. So this will depend a bit on  you. I can do a workout late at night, and it does not seem to affect my ability to sleep.  Jenny, on the other hand, it will. If she does kind of high intensity training at night, that's  not gonna be good for her. So she knows that. She'll do her workouts more in the morning.  I can do my workouts whenever. I actually kind of prefer to work out later in the day, not  like late, but in the late afternoon is my preferred time.  [0:24:01]  But you figure that out for yourself. My Garmin watch, and I bet that my Eight Sleep will do  this. Well, my Eight Sleep won't because it doesn't know if I worked out or not. My Garmin  watch, as part of the sleep coach aspect of that, takes those things into consideration. And  if I don't have a very good night's sleep or whatever, it will say your lack of physical activity  yesterday may have contributed to your less than ideal night's sleep. On the other hand, it  will say things like, your physical activity. And it also always makes a point of the timing of  it. So if I don't remember the sleep coach ever saying your late night workout may have  impacted the quality of your sleep negatively, it may say that actually. 'Cause it's just  gonna have the algorithm that was put in by somebody and they got it from studies like  this. But watch for that yourself. And the moderate intensity, does seem to help the most  with sleep, but movement and connecting this also with the light thing. So going out for a  walk in the morning and having that red light from the sun, from natural sunshine in the  morning, that's going to really put in your, entrench your circadian rhythm and help with  sleep as well. So to have that morning sunlight and physical exercise, all of that working  together.  P - Priority   [0:25:29]  And the last P in the acronym is for priority, treat sleep like a non-negotiable for health and  performance, make it a priority. Back to our article from our friend, Dr. Siegel, impact of  09/01/25   Page   of 8   11

SSC 2.0 - 503: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 1  impaired sleep quality or quantity, metabolic, insulin resistance and increased diabetes  risk, impairment in growth hormone and muscle repair, testosterone suppression and de -  creased libido, ghrelin and leptin imbalance and increased appetite, cardiovascular, in -  crease in autonomic arousal, hypertension, increased risk of arrhythmias, endothelial dys -  function, increased risk for cardiovascular events on the immune system, reduction in anti -  body production, inflammatory cytokine production, increased cold and infection suscepti -  bility. On the neurological side, glymphatic system impairment, memory consolidation im -  pairment. On the psychological side, increased depression risk, acute effects on mood,  irritability, energy level, sense of well-being. Is that enough of a list for you to get a good  night's sleep or to do everything in your power to get a good night's sleep that is with sleep  hygiene? I would think so.  Turn Off Your Alarm!   [0:26:36]  Another tip, turn off your alarm. Now this doesn't work for most people, because most  people, if they're not going to bed early enough, giving themselves enough time in bed for  the sleep that they need, well, they're gonna be late for their job. They're gonna miss an  appointment. You're gonna miss your first patient. So turning off the alarm may not be an  option for you or your patients, but for those that it is an option for, that can be great. I'm  blessed that I most of the time do not have an alarm to wake up and that's really awe -  some. Now, another suggestion would be using a sleep tracker. I've talked about my  Garmin watch many times. So Fitbit, Apple Watch, the Oura Ring, all sorts of things. Most  of those devices will have a smart wake component to it. And that is you can say, all right, I  need to get up, no later than 6:30. And then it will look for a period to wake you up that it's  not taking you out of REM sleep within a window. So it'll say, between 5:30 and 6:30, you  need to get up by 6:30. We're gonna see if you go into lighter sleep, into N2 sleep or  whatever, and then we will wake you up. It'll vibrate or something to wake you up and does  it kind of gently. There's other things that do this with light.  [0:28:06]  So where it mimics the dawn and gets brighter in the room over time. There's lots of differ -  ent things that you can get with this. Number one, though, to get to this point is going to  bed early enough to give yourself enough time for sleep. But if you can do this, if you can  make this happen in your life, it will definitely feel better than just being jarred out of a  dream by the alarm and then hitting the snooze button 14 times. It's interesting how fast  you'll go back into that REM sleep if you do hit the snooze. So snooze is usually like a  nine-minute thing depending on the clock or whatever you're using. And it's not uncommon  to wake up in REM, be woken by the alarm, hit the snooze, and within basically 30 sec -  onds, you're right back in that dream. Pretty amazing.  [0:28:57]  09/01/25   Page   of 9   11

SSC 2.0 - 503: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 1  Speaking of hitting the snooze button, here's a study from 2022 that looked at people who  would use the snooze button and they found that using the snooze alarm prolonged wak -  ing and stage N1 sleep and prolonged sleep inertia. So what that means is the person  would wake up at the first alarm, hit the snooze button that basically created another sleep  cycle, short sleep cycle there, they get awoken again.  [0:29:25]  And the theory on why this resulted in them not waking feeling more awake faster, is that  they were having multiple awakenings instead of just kind of the natural one awakening  and then getting up. Yeah, but one thing that I would consider a confounder in this study,  would be why are they hitting the snooze button all the time? So in my life and in your life  too probably, if you wake up, if you wake up before your alarm and you're like, oh, I'm feel -  ing pretty good right now. And you look at the clock and you're like, oh, alarm's gonna go  off in 10 minutes. And maybe you're just like, maybe just lay there or maybe even close  your eyes again. And then the alarm goes off 10 minutes, you get up. Okay, you don't tend  to be like, oh my gosh, let me hit the snooze button. The days you hit the snooze button,  it's 'cause you feel tired still. Now that could be because you're getting woken up out of ei -  ther deep sleep or REM sleep. REM sleep, your brain will tend to be on 'cause that's how  REM sleep works.  [0:30:24]  Deep sleep, you'll tend to be like, whoa, why am I getting up right now? So I'm not positive  that the snooze button is necessarily terribly bad or that that's a causal type of thing of why  these people had a harder time getting up. But just consider that, that in an ideal world,  you're going to wake up and you're gonna get up. Going back to the last thing I said is ide -  ally having some sort of sleep tracker that can wake you when you're in a transition stage  into N1 or N2 is going to make you feel better when you get up.  Avoid   Caffeine   [0:31:04]  In our section on sleep and drugs, we talked a ton about caffeine. And so, ingesting caf -  feine prior to bedtime can have negative effects on your sleep. In this study on the effect of  caffeine on the subsequent night's sleep, the author said that it was dose related and time  related. And if you recall from this, from the sleep and drugs section there, 100 milligrams,  four hours or longer before sleep didn't seem to make a big difference. Whereas 400 mil -  ligrams closer than 13 hours before sleep seemed to make a pretty big difference.  [0:31:45]  So people that are ingesting caffeine in the morning and then maybe they do a workout  type of drink or something like that in the afternoon or heaven forbid, they get off work and  then do a pre-workout which has a ton of caffeine in it and they go to the gym, that's going  to for sure affect their sleep. So be smart on this. And there is also person to person vari -  ability on how this affects them. As I said in the sleep and drugs section as well, my wife is  09/01/25   Page   of 10   11

SSC 2.0 - 503: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 1  very, very militant almost about taking in caffeine after a certain time. Like she'll legit, you'll  check her watch. If we're on a flight someplace, and she will be like, okay, well what time is  it? When the flight attendant comes by, what would you like to drink? She'll be like, okay,  well what time is it? All right, it's only noon. I can have a Diet Coke or shoot, it's 3 O'clock.  Better have something without caffeine in it.  Ditch the Booze!   [0:32:42]  Next, ditch the booze. So if you have patients that will typically do some sort of nightcap,  you might expose them to the research that says that, reducing alcohol content is correlat -  ed or you may expose them to the research that shows that, reducing consumption of al -  cohol is directly correlated with improvements in sleep. Now this was published in Alcohol  and Alcoholism and talks about people with alcohol use disorder. So alcoholics and any  decrease that they had in their use of alcohol was associated with an increase improve -  ment in their sleep.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 11   11

