SSC 2.0 - 508: Insomnia & Restless Legs Syndrome Part 1  SSC 2.0   Level 5  508: Insomnia & Restless Legs Syndrome  Part 1  [intro music]  Insomnia & Restless Leg Syndrome   [0:00:12]  Hello, and welcome to Insomnia and Restless Legs Syndrome, what you should know, so  you can help your patients and your family. Now, we don't typically treat insomnia, but a lot  of your patients are going to suffer with insomnia. We're going to go into the kind of over -  view of insomnia, the different types of insomnia, and similar to many of the other sections  or sessions in level five, this is about what are you doing when your patients aren't feeling  better, even though the oral appliance therapy is objectively helping them. Their AHI is re -  duced, things like that are looking good, pulse oximetry looks good, the airway's open, the  snoring has decreased, but they still are not sleeping well. They're still sleepy during the  day. This is when we start getting into these things, even though we may not focus on  them directly therapeutically. Thankfully, we have people in our communities who do focus  on these things, and we can get help, but you don't know what you don't know, so we need  to know a little bit here so that we can at least recognize when people are having these  problems.  Insomnia   [0:01:23]  So let's start off first with insomnia, will be the first thing that we talk about. And there are  lots of different types of insomnia, but a general definition of insomnia, difficulty initiating or  maintaining sleep, and there's kind of right there in just a few words, people will have in -  somnia that they can't fall asleep, and other people have sleep maintenance insomnia that  they wake up and can't go back to sleep. Those tend to be different, significantly different  things, and in my experience with people with sleep apnea, oftentimes the type of insom -  nia that they will express prior to being treated for their sleep apnea is this sleep mainte -  nance insomnia. They wake up and can't go back to sleep, and that makes sense when  thinking about obstructive sleep apnea because these people will have an adrenaline rush  as they are suffocating to death, and then due to that adrenaline rush, they won't be able  to go back to sleep. That all makes sense. So a lot of times, you will have people that suf -  fer with that sort of insomnia, treat them with oral appliance therapy, and it will completely  09/01/25   Page   of 1   10

SSC 2.0 - 508: Insomnia & Restless Legs Syndrome Part 1  go away immediately because they are not having that adrenaline rush behavior of the suf -  focating to death.  Insomnia Definitions   [0:02:36]  Okay, moving on with the definition there. May also include non-restorative sleep for more  than one month. Primary insomnia, not clearly connected to something else. That's prima -  ry insomnia. Comorbid insomnia, associated with psychiatric, medical, or some other sleep  disorder like sleep apnea. In order to diagnostically be considered insomnia based on the  DSM manual, DSM-IV, must result in distress or impairment in social, occupational, or oth -  er areas of functioning. So that's important to note there too, that in order for it to be char -  acterized or diagnosed as insomnia, it has to impact them negatively. So that isn't just, I  don't feel I sleep well. It is, how is this affecting you in these different ways? And this is a  little bit of a tough one because people will get used to or develop a tolerance, if you will,  for poor sleep. This is something that I'm sure you've noticed by now. If you've treated  more than a dozen or more patients, that you will have patients say to you, I didn't realize  how bad my sleep was. When something gets worse over a long period of time, it's hard to  really recognize that change. It's like looking at pictures of your children and the difference  particularly in a child of a six-year-old and a 16-year-old is dramatic.  [0:04:12]  But when you're seeing them on a daily basis, you don't notice that dramatic change. Even  in yourself, if I look at myself from 10, 15 years ago, I was like, wow, I had more hair. The  hair that I had was more red. I have changed over time, but looking at myself in the mirror  every day, I don't notice these changes in the same way. When you open someone's air -  way and all of a sudden they get a good night's sleep, it's like, wow, I am sleeping better  than I have in a decade, in 20 years, in 30 years, and they will notice that. So conversely, if  their sleep is disturbed over time, they may not be able to articulate how that's affecting  them because it's been so long for them to have a good night's sleep.  What is Insomnia?   [0:04:58]  A little bit more on the definition of insomnia. So we have these two basic types, the can't  get to sleep and can't stay asleep type.  Diagnosis of Insomnia   [0:05:07]  Let's read through the International Classification of Sleep Disorders from the ASM back in  2014. So, starting over here with, A, the patient reports or the patient's parent or caregiver  09/01/25   Page   of 2   10

SSC 2.0 - 508: Insomnia & Restless Legs Syndrome Part 1  observes one or more of the following. So this is our diagnostic criteria for chronic insom -  nia, difficulty initiating sleep, difficulty maintaining sleep, waking up earlier than desired,  resistance to going to bed on appropriate schedule, difficulty sleeping without parent or  caregiver intervention. So that's A. B, patient reports or the patient's parent or caregiver  observes one or more of the following related to the nighttime sleep difficulty. Fatigue or  malaise. Attention, concentration, or memory impairment. Impaired social, family, occupa -  tional, or academic performance. Mood disturbance or irritability. Daytime sleepiness, be -  havioral problems, hyperactivity, impulsivity, aggression. Reduced motivation, energy, or  initiative. Proneness for errors and accidents. Concerns about or dissatisfaction with sleep.  So far, we need one or more of A and one or more of B. C, the reported sleep-wake com -  plaints cannot be explained purely by inadequate opportunity, i.e., enough time is allotted  for sleep, or inadequate circumstances, i.e., the environment is safe, dark, quiet, and com -  fortable for sleep.  [0:06:26]  So for C, it can't be that they're working four jobs and so they just don't have time to sleep.  It also can't be that they're in a war zone and so they don't feel safe. That would make it so  that that would not be characterized as insomnia, that would be characterized as their en -  vironment is causing the problem. D, the sleep disturbance and associated daytime symp -  toms occur at least three times per week. E, the sleep disturbance and associated daytime  symptoms have been present for at least three months. F, the sleep-wake difficulty is not  better explained by another sleep disorder. So there is your diagnostic criteria for insom -  nia. One or more of A, one or more of B, and then C, D, E, and F have to be met as well.  [0:07:11]  Now, this is meaning too, that if someone has had disturbed sleep for a month, it's not go -  ing to qualify as diagnostic for insomnia. Three months is a long time, isn't it? So there are  probably lots of people out there that have episodic insomnia. They may have insomnia for  a week or two, and then they kind of get better, and it goes away, and then maybe it  comes back, and vice versa, and that would not be something that would be diagnosed  based on these criteria as insomnia. And remember from our previous discussion that if  this does not impair their abilities during the day, it's not considered insomnia.  Prevalence of Insomnia   [0:07:58]  So now that we've defined what insomnia is, let's talk about the prevalence of insomnia.  And first here on the graphic, and this is taken from a few different studies here, 30% to  50% of older adults experience insomnia symptoms. Now, that doesn't mean that they met  the diagnostic criteria, so we move to the next box here, 10% meet the diagnostic criteria  of insomnia disorder. Now, that's still a pretty high number. If 30% to 50% of older adults  have disturbed sleep on a fairly regular basis is what that's saying, 10% will move into that  more than three times a week for three months to meet those diagnostic criteria. Next box  09/01/25   Page   of 3   10

SSC 2.0 - 508: Insomnia & Restless Legs Syndrome Part 1  here, insomnia in women is significantly higher than in men. 27% have acute insomnia,  and then 2% develop into chronic insomnia. So, pretty big numbers. Even the chronic in -  somnia of 2% is pretty awful. 27% having acute insomnia, and a lot of these are related to  obstructive sleep apnea. This can be the reason that they're not going to sleep, the reason  that they are waking up during sleep.  Worldwide Prevalence of Insomnia   [0:09:13]  Speaking again of our older adults, here is an infographic from a rather large study that  was performed between December 2022 and March 2023. 252 studies included, 35 years  of data, 36 countries, almost a million participants, and these, as it says at the top, world -  wide prevalence of sleep problems in community-dwelling older adults, systematic review  and meta-analysis. So poor sleep quality. So again, these are people in community-  dwelling older adults, retirement type of centers, care centers, things like that. Poor sleep  quality was 40% total, and then it's broken down in male and female, so more in men than  women there. Insomnia, almost 30%, a little bit more in women. Excessive daytime sleepi -  ness, about 19% of folks, about evenly matched, a little bit more in men. Obstructive sleep  apnea, almost half of the folks there, more in men than women, but women still, quite a  few of them, having obstructive sleep apnea in the older age group.  [0:10:22]  As you know, after menopause, sleep apnea gets pretty much the same in men and  women, and then other sleep problems, 37%, also about equally matched there men and  women. So that's a lot of problems that people are having. Note that the biggest there on  the graph is obstructive sleep apnea. And obstructive sleep apnea, oftentimes ignored in  this group of patients, is often ignored all over the place. But that's sad that there's so  many of these people. And again, if that percentage has obstructive sleep apnea, and that  obstructive sleep apnea is not necessarily addressed, then they're going to have these  other sleep disorders as well, logically.  Types of Insomnia   [0:11:06]  Okay. Let's go through now the multiple types of insomnia. So first, we have our acute in -  somnia, short-term sleeping difficulties. Chronic insomnia, long-lasting insomnia. This is  going to be more than your three months. Onset insomnia, difficulty falling asleep. Sleep  maintenance insomnia, difficulty staying asleep or waking up too early. Mixed insomnia,  this is trouble falling asleep and staying asleep, that's a bummer. Behavioral insomnia,  children who have consistent trouble falling asleep, refusal to go to bed, or both. Paradoxi -  cal insomnia, this is a curious one, you'll hear this from your patients, feels like you sleep a  lot less than you really do. This is where it becomes quite helpful for people to have sleep  09/01/25   Page   of 4   10

SSC 2.0 - 508: Insomnia & Restless Legs Syndrome Part 1  trackers of some sort. I know I use Jenny a lot as an example, but that's because I'm inti -  mately aware of her sleep issues and things like that. And she has an Oura ring, I have my  Garmin watch. And so both of us track our sleep every night. And Jenny has learned by  tracking her sleep, and she's had more than just the Oura ring, she's had the Wesper de -  vice, she has an Apple watch, she's had various things, she likes the Oura ring the best as  far as the easiness of use.  [0:12:21]  But what she has found is that she needs longer in bed to get a certain amount of sleep. I  tend to have, I go to sleep pretty quick and have pretty continuous sleep. Jenny will take a  little longer to go to sleep and will have a little bit more fragmented sleep. And so that's  something to keep in mind. And if people are tracking their sleep, you might be able to  help them with this. Like, hey, you know what? Let's look at this for a month's period of  time. How much sleep total bedtime do you have, total time in bed do you have, okay, nine  hours, and how much of that is actually sleep? Oh, only seven and a half hours. Okay. So  you need, in order to get your seven and a half hours sleep, you need to be nine hours in  bed. If you get eight hours in bed, you only got six and a half hours of sleep or whatever.  You're going to be able to kind of see those things.  [0:13:14]  Mental health condition insomnia, most common chronic insomnia in a sleep clinic. Inade -  quate sleep hygiene, symptoms meet criteria for insomnia. Insomnia due to drugs or sub -  stance use, prescription drugs, recreational drugs, and caffeine and foods. Medical condi -  tion insomnia, timing relates to medical condition like orthopedic issues, back, neck, and  shoulder, COPD, and asthma. So those are all of the different types of insomnia that one  might encounter.  Causes & Risk Factor of Insomnia   [0:13:42]  Causes and risk factors of insomnia, age or getting older, higher risk for insomnia. Fe -  males, more at risk than men. Family history and genetics, so if your mom or dad has in -  somnia, you're more likely to have insomnia. Environment or occupation, shift workers,  harder problems with this because the circadian rhythms grew up there. Noise and light  during the night, uncomfortable high or low temperatures. You may have experienced  acute insomnia with this. If you've traveled someplace that's very warm, it can be very dif -  ficult for you to sleep. Lifestyle factors, so changing sleep schedule, travel a lot in different  time zones, taking long naps during the day, getting too little physical activity. This is an -  other benefit of tracking sleep on a long-term basis is your sleep tracker will learn how  physical exercise impacts your sleep. My Garmin will sometimes say something like, hey,  you had a very restful day and that contributed to your sleep. Sometimes it will say you  had a great workout that contributed to the quality of your sleep.  [0:14:53]  09/01/25   Page   of 5   10

SSC 2.0 - 508: Insomnia & Restless Legs Syndrome Part 1  Sometimes it'll say you didn't have much activity and that maybe made your sleep not as  good. So it's taking all of these data points in and the longer you use something like that,  the better that tracking can become. Next, using caffeine, nicotine, alcohol, recreational  drugs, and lastly, watching TV or using electronic devices close to bedtime. So all of that  stuff that we talk about in sleep hygiene. Furthermore, stress, concerns at work, school,  health, money, family. This is that rumination that occurs of going over things in your mind.  If you had a disagreement with somebody, an argument, or had crosswords with some -  body and you're kind of replaying that in your mind. If you have financial worries, of  course, that can be a problem. If you're a parent, it's been said that a parent is only as  happy as their least happy child and that can cause sleep problems. If you just had a fight  with your spouse, that can cause sleep problems, all sorts of stuff like that. So there's the  stress component as well. And taking that stuff to bed from the last bullet point of the elec -  tronics and whatnot, giving yourself, hey, right before bed, let me check in with the news  and see how everything's falling apart and we might die of nuclear war while I sleep right  now.  [0:16:14]  Let's check in on that really quick before I try to go to sleep. Probably not smart reading a  murder book right before bed or something like that. So reducing cortisol before bedtime,  pretty good idea. Medicines, we've had a whole section on with sleep and drugs. Mental  health disorders are correlated with insomnia and poor sleep. Medical conditions, of  course, and then, of course, sleep disorders themselves.  Protect the Airway   [0:16:43]  Our job is to protect the airway, but when people aren't feeling any better, then we need to  be looking at these things. And it's smart as you are going through the person's history and  asking them questions like, what started you down this journey of sleep apnea in the first  place? And they say things like, well, I have insomnia or I had insomnia or whatever, and  they go through that. You should kind of tuck that away of like, all right, so this person,  their problem was waking up in the middle of the night and not being able to go back to  sleep. And then you're going to hope like crazy that protecting their airway takes care of  that. But if it doesn't and you've forgotten about that in the meantime and you're just blam -  ing the appliance and changing the vertical and changing the AP or whatever, and it's like,  hey, let's go back and readdress that whole wake up, can't go back to sleep thing again.  [0:17:38]  Any insight on that? And they're like, oh, well, I don't know if this could be it, but I love to  watch real crime dramas before I go to bed. And then I have sometimes these dreams  where I'm kind of like in that real crime drama stuff and I wake up and I'm all anxious and  heart palpitations and stuff like that. I have a hard time going back to sleep. Oh, really? Is it  09/01/25   Page   of 6   10

SSC 2.0 - 508: Insomnia & Restless Legs Syndrome Part 1  possible that that could have something to do with it? And this is why we're kind of going  through all this stuff.  Treatment of Insomnia   [0:18:09]  All right. So treatment of insomnia. The best treatment for insomnia is cognitive behavioral  therapy. This is the best treatment for insomnia, definitely not medications. So here are  some of the things that they will do is sleep hygiene. And in going to cognitive behavioral  therapy, they're going to start with sleep hygiene, such as all of the things we covered way  back in level one with sleep hygiene. But I'll just kind of go around the horn here. So a  consistent nighttime routine. Remember, my acronym for sleep hygiene is SLEEP. And if  you remember what those were, S is for sleepy time. And that's the consistent time for  sleep and giving yourself enough time for sleep. L is for light, so limiting light exposure be -  fore bed and not having light in your room. E is environment, so having the cool environ -  ment, if you like a cool environment for sleep, a dark environment, a quiet environment.  The second E is exercise. And the last for P is priority. That is your sleep hygiene. Acro -  nym should be easy to remember. So all of these are going to be connected on that here.  This won't be in the order because I spell sleep with my acronym there. But the first one,  establish a consistent nighttime routine. Get up and go to bed same time each day. That's  also the S. Make healthy sleep environment, so dark and quiet and cool. Limit caffeine and  alcohol. No electronics an hour before sleep time. De-stress. Prioritize sleep. There's the P  in it too. Exercise. Eat healthy diet. Light snack prior to sleep for some people.  [0:19:45]  That will depend on you and you can experiment with that. If a little bit of protein right be -  fore bed is good for you or if it's better for you to go to bed on a little bit of a, not a little bit,  but of an empty stomach, having that kind of empty stomach feeling, sometimes that's bet -  ter for other people. What's for sure not good is to eat a big heavy meal right before sleep.  That we know for sure is not great. Relaxation therapy. And these have some overlap  here. So exercise can be included in that. Mindfulness or meditation. Progressive muscle  relaxation and sometimes a guided progressive muscle relaxation can be helpful. Yoga.  Visualizations. Slow deep breathing or all sorts of different breathing techniques can be  used. Not necessarily a this is better than that. It's more important of what will you do. The  best exercise, the very, very, very best exercise for long-term health and vitality is the one  you will do.  [0:20:46]  So the best de-stress method is the one you will do. If you find breathing techniques, you  enjoy that, then do that. If you like meditation, then by all means, that's fantastic. If you try  to meditate and you just can't slow down your brain, maybe you should try meditating  more and get better at it over time. If you like yoga, great. So whatever the person can do,  but it's nice to give people options of like, hey, here's multiple different things that you  09/01/25   Page   of 7   10

SSC 2.0 - 508: Insomnia & Restless Legs Syndrome Part 1  could try. Why don't you try to find something that you like and that you can do and that  you can also make a routine. The more routine you can make something, then our brain  gets into that Pavlov dog type of experience there. It's like, oh, lights have dimmed and  Jamison is reading a book right now. That must mean that we're getting ready to go to  sleep. This is what we do before we go to sleep. I'm now in get ready to go to sleep mode.  [0:21:45]  It's like when I tell my Tesla that I'm headed into a charging station, it will come up with an  alert that says optimizing battery for quick charging. That's kind of what you're doing here.  You're telling your brain, hey, let's go ahead and get set up here for optimized recharging. I  love that analogy right there. Let's get ready for optimized recharging and here's the rou -  tine that I go through. Help your patients with this. Sleep restriction therapy. Now, this is for  people that they are the lay in a bed all night kind of person. It's not really all night, but  they're having a hard time initiating sleep. So these folks, we want, I'll go ahead and read  through each of these things here. So keep a sleep diary to define the need to sleep  hours. Choose a bedtime and stick to it.  [0:22:37]  Choose a wake time, get up without any delay. So do not spend any time in bed not sleep -  ing. And after two weeks, gradually increase your sleep time. So, the idea here is that you  take people who need eight hours and you make it so they only get five hours. And so  they're real tired by the time they go to bed and then they get up and then they start mov -  ing that time so that they're not associating bed with non-sleep. They're associating bed  with sleep. So that's a very superficial look at that. A cognitive behavioral therapist, some -  one that does this, are going to be way more sophisticated on that, but that's kind of an  overview of sleep restriction technique. Now, a seemingly very similar to sleep restriction  therapy is so-called stimulus control therapy. And if you look at this, it sounds like kind of  the same thing. So wake up a certain time, only go to bed when sleepy, getting off the bed  if not sleepy, make the bedroom a relaxing place, avoid napping during the day, some oth -  er stuff there. But we're just trying to focus on the bed is for sleep.  [0:23:43]  This is a nice infographic from this 2021 study of a review of digital cognitive behavioral  therapy for insomnia. And they've got the sleep hygiene on the one side, stimulus control,  sleep restriction, relaxation, and the cognitive aspect, and then the wrap-up part of going  through each of those things with the patient to make sure that there's no relapse of the  insomnia. So what about treatment of insomnia? And we did a whole section there on  sleep and drugs where I go through all of these different sleep so-called treatment drugs.  So you can go through that section and go through all of that.  Say   No To Drugs   [0:24:22]  09/01/25   Page   of 8   10

SSC 2.0 - 508: Insomnia & Restless Legs Syndrome Part 1  But just kind of a note here, so pharmacological intervention can be proposed if cognitive  behavioral therapy is not effective. So, cognitive behavioral therapy is going to be first and  foremost, medications only used if necessary. I was talking to Dr. Noah Siegel, a friend of  mine the other day. He's an ear, nose, and throat sleep doctor, if you don't know Dr. Siegel,  and he says, just say no. So when he was talking to me about this, he says he virtually  never prescribes medications for insomnia. Virtually never. And if that's a sleep doctor, an  ENT sleep doctor, who's saying that, I don't think we should ever get involved in this. So  there are the so-called phytotherapeutics. There's the melatonin receptor antagonist, in -  cluding melatonin itself. There's things like that that we can maybe tell our patients, hey,  maybe try to take some valerian root or try some three milligram melatonin. Try this. Again,  go back to the sleep and drugs one and watch that again if you want to learn more about  that. But that's as far as I'll go, is talking to patients about using certain things like that for  short periods of time. And if they find it's like, whoa, that makes a big difference for me,  that shouldn't be an indicator for you that they were deficient in valerian root. That should  be an indication to you that there's something going on. And why do they need this? What  is going on in their normal healthy lifestyle that they hopefully have that is making it so that  they have to take some sort of supplement or, heaven forbid, medication in order for them  to get a good night's sleep? Just like Noah, I say, just say no.  Prevention of Insomnia   [0:26:06]  So, to wrap up insomnia prevention, relaxing bedtime routine, go to sleep, wake up around  the same time every day, avoid stimulants, particularly close to bedtime, regular exercise,  healthy diet, eat meals on a regular schedule, manage stress, all the sleep hygiene stuff,  good environment, all of that. If you're doing all of those things and you're still having a  problem, then you need to talk to a sleep doctor about that if you're being treated by a  sleep doctor or your PCP. Again, I would be doing labs if I were you at this point. I would  be encouraging the patient to do labs. Our role as dentists in the treatment of these sleep-  related breathing disorders that we are dealing with is to be aware of insomnia, talk to our  patients about it, make sure they're doing all the stuff. And if they swear to you that they  are doing all the stuff, all the good stuff, and none of the bad stuff, and they're snoring less,  but they're not feeling better, this is when you talk to the primary care doctor or their sleep  doctor and say, hey, oral appliance seems to be working in that the snoring is reduced.  Okay. That's going to be our objective measure that the treatment is working is the snoring  is better. How do you measure that? Well, you could use SnoreLab. It's an easy way to do  that. Bed partner report is going to be pretty good too. SnoreLab is going to be more ob -  jective than the bed partner report. But they still aren't feeling better, that's when you're go -  ing to punt to the primary care doctor or sleep doctor to say, hey, this person sounds like  they may have primary insomnia. This other does not seem to be related to their sleep ap -  nea. Their sleep apnea seems to be controlled. Let's get them back in your hands. Let's  09/01/25   Page   of 9   10

SSC 2.0 - 508: Insomnia & Restless Legs Syndrome Part 1  figure out what's going on here. They need some help because they're still really tired dur -  ing the day. So, that is insomnia.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 10   10

