SSC 2.0 - 509:   Insomnia & Restless Legs Syndrome Part 2  SSC 2.0   Level 5  509:   Insomnia & Restless Legs Syndrome  Part 2  [intro music]  Restless Legs Syndrome   [0:00:12]  Now let's move on to restless legs syndrome. And the reason that I put these together is  that it is a physical difficulty in going to sleep or maintaining sleep. So both insomnia and  restless legs syndrome, although very different disorders, but both occurring at night trying  to sleep or when you're trying to sleep, I should say, because there's some people that  have to sleep during the day because they work at night. But that's why I'm kind of packag -  ing them together in the same discussion here. So what is restless legs syndrome? So  restless legs syndrome, also called Willis-Ekbom disease, is a neurological condition that  causes an irresistible urge to move the legs.  “URGE”   [0:00:56]  Now that is the key right there is this urge. And this is an acronym that they have come up  with to help us remember this urge. So the U is urge to move the limbs, usually associated  with paresthesia or dysesthesia. They feel their legs are just creepy crawly, it's usually  legs, and that they've got to get up and move. Urge to move. R is rest brings about symp -  toms or worsens them. So this person, their legs feel fine during the day and they may ex -  ercise, they may do different things, and they don't have leg problems until they lay down.  It's when they lay down and are trying to sleep that this problem occurs. No other time.  Getting up and moving improves symptoms. So that's the G. And then last, evenings are  when symptoms worsen. That sounds a little bit like the R there as well, right? So the U  and the G and the R and the E are kind of similar, but that's urge.  [0:01:58]  Bottom line, feel they've got to move, happens when they're trying to sleep. That is rest -  less leg syndrome in a nutshell. Restless leg syndrome is considered a sleep-related  movement disorder. And interesting though, and as I've talked to my sleep doctor friends  about this, they find it curious as well that it is considered a sleep disorder because by def -  inition the person's not asleep. They're trying to sleep, but they're not asleep. But never -  theless, that's what it is.  09/01/25   Page   of 1   8

SSC 2.0 - 509:   Insomnia & Restless Legs Syndrome Part 2  Prevalence of Restless Legs Syndrome   [0:02:28]  So what is the prevalence of restless legs syndrome? So studies estimate the global  prevalence is about 7%. Highest prevalence rates found in European regions, while  African countries report the lowest rates. Prevalence translates to about 356 million indi -  viduals affected globally. This is taken from data from these studies that were relatively re -  cent, 23 and 24 in the prevalence there.   Around 7% of the U.S. Population has restless leg  syndrome, more common in white people and women. And women are commonly more  affected to men in a two to one ratio. I have a couple family members that suffer with this,  and it does definitely have a genetic predisposition. So my wife Jenny, she has restless leg  syndrome, and her brother Carl has it really, really bad. Much worse than she does. Jenny  has found various things that help her. Magnesium, if her vitamin D levels are correct, that  will make a really big difference. Red light therapy has made a big difference for her. And  then it's periodic, or it's not all the time that she has a problem, but it's some of the time.  We also have a sonic machine, so you may have seen like those vibe plates in gyms and  stuff sometimes, where it's a vibrating plate that people will stand on. We have one of  those, except it's a big speaker. And so the vibration comes from sound waves, which is  pretty cool. That helps her tremendously as well. So prevalence, again, more in white peo -  ple, more in women.  [0:04:14]  So here's a graphic from that 2024 prevalence study and looking at all over the world. But  note that the percentiles, if you just kind of scan the different areas with the percentiles, so  they're in North America, 7.69, South America, 7.05, Northern Europe, 7.4, Middle East,  about 7, you know, 6.9, Africa, 6.4. So we're not that drastically different around the world.  So as I said on the previous slide there, more common in white people, but you can see in  Africa, 6.48%. In Northern Europe, 7.4%. So we're not talking dramatic differences here,  whereas in the men to women, it's 2 to 1, women versus men. So it's kind of a nice graphic  here just kind of showing where this is the most common, also getting worse as people get  older.  Types of Restless Legs Syndrome   [0:05:21]  With primary restless leg syndrome, as I previously mentioned, cause is pretty much un -  known. There does seem to be a genetic component, also could be related to dopamine  levels and iron, iron being low. Onset is usually before the age of 40, and then it progress -  es with age and will usually have periods of remission and exacerbation. That's definitely  been Jenny's case, that sometimes it bothers her for several days in a row and then it just  goes away. And then sometimes she'll have weeks or even months without a problem at  all. Secondary restless leg syndrome, as the name implies, is typically related to some -  09/01/25   Page   of 2   8

SSC 2.0 - 509:   Insomnia & Restless Legs Syndrome Part 2  thing else. So this may be related to a medical condition or a deficiency of some sort, usu -  ally progresses quickly and after age 40 and may resolve if the underlying actual etiology  is figured out.  [0:06:16]  So if you are trying to figure out if it's primary or secondary RLS, again, this was not some -  thing that we're going to actively manage in our patients, but if you're just trying to figure  out from a diagnostic point of view, just remember primary before 40 and nothing related to  it at all. And possibly someone in their gene pool has this too. Secondary, probably after  40, probably is related to some other medical diagnosis and typically would not have a ge -  netic connection.  Risk Factors of Restless Legs Syndrome   [0:06:49]  Risk factors for restless leg syndrome, already mentioned the age, either below 40 for pri -  mary, above 40 for secondary, more common in women than men. Associated medical  conditions include the ones listed here. I mentioned iron deficiency a few times. That is  definitely something that I would encourage the patient to get checked immediately if that  is a problem.   Now you aren't going to see on the list vitamin D, but if you look up informa -  tion on vitamin D levels, you will find that there is some correlation between vitamin D and  low levels of vitamin D and restless leg syndrome. That's a bit of a controversial one too,  because low vitamin D, as far as a blood test is concerned, normal vitamin D levels are  actually significantly lower than some experts believe vitamin D levels should be. I tend to  believe that vitamin D levels should be significantly higher around the 60 range versus I  think on blood tests, if you are anywhere above 15 or 18, that's considered normal. Heredi -  ty, 25 to 75% of people with RLS have a family history, and then medications that can be  associated with RLS include antihistamines, antidepressants, and anti-nausea medica -  tions.  Treatment of Restless Legs Syndrome   [0:08:07]  Treatment, here's a bit of a bummer for restless leg syndrome, there's really no treatment  directed at this that seems to be effective. So the main treatment is trying to figure out  what is the cause in the first place and the patient figuring out what things might work. As  mentioned just previously, check their iron for sure, have that checked out. If they haven't  talked to their primary care doctor about their restless leg syndrome, make sure that they  do and they can do a full panel and make sure that everything is within normal realms. If  they're going to do that, you could pull an article on vitamin D, maybe send that to that  physician, say, hey, I've heard this from some colleagues of mine that vitamin D levels can  sometimes be associated with this, and they could then maybe check that as well. You  09/01/25   Page   of 3   8

SSC 2.0 - 509:   Insomnia & Restless Legs Syndrome Part 2  would want to get the report of that blood test because normal, just like with sleep apnea  and whatnot, normal is an AHI 4, right? Well, if you were woke up every 15 minutes, would  you feel normal? Probably not. So normal and optimal are not necessarily the same thing.  So I would look at that blood test and then post it to Spencer Study Club, stuff like that, get  some help with that and see if there's anything out of whack for your patient if the primary  care doctor doesn't drive the bus on this one, which hopefully they will.  [0:09:28]  Medications that will sometimes be used are not necessarily off-label for this, but they're  medications that have been created for other things that may give patients some level of  relief, so anti-seizure medications.   You will see this a lot with any type of pain disorders  too, people that have been diagnosed, oftentimes misdiagnosed with trigeminal neuralgia  and other neuropathies will often be put on gabapentin and medications like it. Iron sup -  plements, if it's noted that there's a iron deficiency, obviously that would make sense. Opi -  oids for severe cases of restless leg syndrome, and this is really to help with the pain and  that urge to move, you're sedating the patient. That would also be your benzodiazepines,  so Valium and things like that that are going to have a sedating type of effect, those can be  helpful for folks. As I mentioned on the sleep and drugs session there that the benzodi -  azepines are sometimes even referred to as muscle relaxants, and it's not that they're act -  ing directly on the muscle themselves, but it's acting at the CNS level and resulting in this  so-called relaxation. Dopaminergic agents, so like carbidopa and levodopa, these can also  be helped. These are medications that are used sometimes in people with seizures and  things like that, but again, long-term, this may even make the symptoms worse.  Lifestyle and Home Remedies   [0:11:01]  Lifestyle and home remedies for RLS include bathing and massages, like doing a soak  with your legs, Epsom salt baths, things like that. Apply warm or cool packs, so ice packs  or heat in the effective area and deciding which works the best. This can also be impacted  by the warming or cooling beds that a lot of people have now that my wife and I have had  for a while. We've had the Ooler, the Chili Pad, and most recently have gotten the Eight  Sleep. We'll see how that affects Jenny. We don't have that actually installed in the bed  yet, but will soon. That's a pretty cool one in that it is making adjustments based on feed -  back. So it has its own sleep tracker built into the system. And so if it's detecting your tem -  perature, your body temperature going through the night, and then it's going to adjust the  temperature of the bed as you sleep. And it will make a bunch of changes throughout your  sleep cycle. And hopefully that will help. As I've mentioned on other lectures, bringing that  up on the cooling bed sheet things, the different devices that are out there, that has a  tremendous impact on hot flashes for women. And that could be related here as well to  restless leg syndrome being in similar populations. Although restless leg syndrome, as  mentioned before, typically starts before 40, but then can get worse as people get older.  09/01/25   Page   of 4   8

SSC 2.0 - 509:   Insomnia & Restless Legs Syndrome Part 2  Avoiding caffeine, that can have an effect. Exercise, regular exercise, good sleep hygiene.  And then lastly, foot wrap. There's a foot wrap specially designed for people with RLS, and  that can help. Interesting.  Soap to Stop Restless Leg Syndrome?   [0:12:51]  And speaking of interesting, can a bar of soap stop restless legs? And so this is, you can  kind of look this up. It's online. If you Google this or ask AI about this, it's going to give you  all sorts of information. The first time I heard about putting a bar of soap in the foot of the  bed, I know this sounds nuts, but you put a bar of soap under the sheet, under your fitted  sheet, at the foot of your bed if you suffer with RLS. And there's certain kinds of soap that  seem to do better. I think Irish Springs is one of the ones that works really, really well, I've  been told. The person who told me about that first was a Dr. Lee, Dr. Lee, he goes by, Lee  Ching, who used to be the sleep director at National Jewish Hospital in Denver.  [0:13:52]  And he was speaking at a big sleep medicine conference and he was talking about this.  And he's like, hey, you know, this is kind of anecdotal, but I hear this from my patients all  the time. And the theory behind this is that it has magnesium and other things in it, and  maybe that somehow is affecting the patient. So, you know, if you have restless leg syn -  drome or someone in your family has restless leg syndrome, Google this, look for the folk  remedies, try it, because why not? So as soon as I heard about that, I think while he's  speaking about it, I text Jenny, who had a little bit of a problem with it at that time, but pret -  ty minor, but I knew that her brother, who's like about six years younger than her, I knew  that he had a massive problem with this and he tried it. Unfortunately, it didn't help him a  bunch, but at least, you know, at least he tried.  What Can Be Mistaken For RLS?   [0:14:49]  Now, sometimes there can be other problems that may be mistaken as restless leg syn -  drome, and that could include peripheral neuropathies, nerve disorders, akathisia, which is  a breakdown of the autonomic nervous system, and then painful legs and, quote, moving  toe syndrome. Never heard about that till I prepared for this presentation. And you can  kind of read what that's about there. Again, the key with restless leg syndrome is go back  to urge. Okay, so it's that urge to move, they're restless. It's those are the key hallmarks of  restless leg syndrome. And remember, it's treated as a sleep disorder, but by definition, the  person's awake because they can't sleep. A few other things that might be mistaken, mer -  algia paresthesia, nocturnal leg cramps, arthritis, and then positional discomfort, where  basically they're laying in such a way that it compresses a nerve. And so their leg falls  09/01/25   Page   of 5   8

SSC 2.0 - 509:   Insomnia & Restless Legs Syndrome Part 2  asleep, they get the pins and needles, all those sorts of things. Once again, remember  urge.  What About PLMS?   [0:15:55]  So what about periodic limb movement? So PLMs, you will hear often associated with rest -  less leg syndrome. These are different things, though. In general, restless leg syndrome,  think awake, urge to move, stuff like that. PLMs, think asleep, but disrupting the sleep. So  periodic limb movement, common sleep phenotype characterized by restless legs. But  again, during sleep or when the person's falling asleep, all of us have had the Jimmy leg  as we are dozing off. That would be a PLM. In general, if someone had a PSG, where a  PLM is going to be picked up. So that's a bummer about home sleep testing and whatnot.  We don't have that data. You're not going to know if someone had a whole bunch of PLMs  that disturbed their sleep. But in a PSG, they have leads on the legs that will pick up  PLMs. So these will cause arousals, fragmented sleep, and daytime fatigue due to the  fragmented sleep. If you look at PSGs, you will see PLMs, and you will typically see PLMs  associated with an arousal. So if they had a leg jerk, but they stayed in deep sleep, leg  jerk stayed in REM sleep, then that wouldn't count as a PLM that led to an arousal. If they  have a PLM and it jumps them out of REM sleep or deep sleep, then that would. So you  can see that on a full PSG. Are the PLMs not really bothersome to the patient's sleep, or  are they tremendously bothersome? This is comorbid with other sleep disorder, variety of  medical conditions, neurologic and psychiatric disorders, and may be related to some  medications. Periodic limb movements rarely primary itself.  [0:17:42]  It is often associated with restless legs. Once again, restless legs being more awake,  PLMs being more during sleep. Remember the iron deficiency. So even though these are  different things, the causes are often related, and so they're going to look for, diagnose,  and treat PLMs and RLS basically the same way. But just you remember that this is some -  thing I see people in our field often will make that mistake. They will refer to PLMs as rest -  less legs, and they aren't. Okay, so just you know the difference now after listening to this,  and so you can talk to your patient, and they'll tell you the difference, RLS, urge, and  PLMs. They typically won't know, or if they do know, maybe it's because they had a PSG  and it was on the PSG. If they had PLMs on a PSG, I would try my hardest to get them  back into a full PSG when you're checking the oral appliance therapy to see if the PLMs  improve. So some people believe that PLMs may be related to obstructive sleep apnea.  Maybe this is like bruxism. Maybe bruxism is a periodic limb movement, so to speak. It's  just with the jaws.  [0:19:01]  So that is something to consider too, that perhaps with the treatment of their obstructive  sleep apnea, the PLMs get better. Interestingly, some research has shown when patients  09/01/25   Page   of 6   8

SSC 2.0 - 509:   Insomnia & Restless Legs Syndrome Part 2  are put on medication specifically for RLS and periodic limb movements, again same med -  ications being used for these, that their sleep architecture will improve even though the  number of PLMs don't seem to change. PLMs seem to increase with age. If they are not  bothering the person, then we don't worry about it. It's treated. If it is going to be treated,  it's treated just like RLS, and it's diagnosed on a full PSG, not an HST. Here you see on a  sleep histogram from a PSG that we have down here. You see the left anterior tibialis  muscle and the right anterior tibialis muscle, so they'd be on your shin basically. And we  have these jimmy legs, jump, jump, jump, jump. So it's typically repetitive and stereotypical  movements, usually once a minute or more, and this will happen over and over again. And  then in the sleep study, they will connect that either with an arousal or without an arousal.  PLM that occur without an arousal are less worrisome than those that are causing or seem  to be causal to an arousal.  [0:20:26]  What is the overlap of periodic limb movements and restless legs? Well, it's a heck of a lot.  So more people have periodic limb movement or periodic limb movements of sleep, PLMS  and RLS, and you see the overlap there. So 80% of those with restless leg syndrome also  have periodic limb movements of sleep. There's only a small percentage, 20% that have  restless leg syndrome without periodic limb movements of sleep. So this is why these  things are commonly maybe misunderstood or said as if they're the same thing, even  though they aren't the same thing. But many, many, many people, 80% of the people with  restless leg also going to have periodic limb movements. But you notice in this two circle  Venn diagram here that there are lots of people with periodic limb movement sleep that  don't have restless legs and that there are a small percentage of people, 20% of people  that have restless legs that don't have periodic limb movements of sleep. That's what you  should take home from this graphic. Okay, so that should give you a pretty good overview  of insomnia and restless leg syndrome periodic limb movements. Once again, why we're  even talking about this is this can disrupt people's sleep.  [0:21:45]  It can result in daytime somnolence, in fatigue, in not getting better. So even if their airway  is protected, people can still have these problems due to something like iron deficiency,  which your doctor who did the HST that was mailed to the patient's home and the doctor's  six states away and read the HST and ordered that oral appliance for the patient, they  didn't do blood tests. They didn't do anything about the iron. They don't know if there's an  iron deficiency or not. This is why I will continually preach to you that you should have local  connections, get patients into local doctors, connect with their local doctors, try to work  through those circles. That's going to be the best care. Now don't get me wrong. I don't  mean that you can't treat people without having full panels on every patient and stuff like  that. I don't mean that at all. What I'm talking about and all of this basically level five is talk -  ing about is when you've treated somebody and they're not getting better.  [0:22:47]  Okay, so if you have somebody obstructive sleep apnea, you give them an oral appliance  and they are snoring less, feeling better really quick, everything seems awesome. They go  09/01/25   Page   of 7   8

SSC 2.0 - 509:   Insomnia & Restless Legs Syndrome Part 2  back for objective study, whatever their physician thinks is appropriate. And it's looking like  their AHI is significantly better. They're better. Everybody's happy. We're good. We're done.  That happens the vast majority of the time. If you're new to this field, that is normal. That's  the normal state of affairs. However, 10 to 20% of the time, which is going to be a lot if you  are new to this field. So you don't have 10 to 20% of the time that root canals fail or that a  crown doesn't work. The patient still has pain or stuff like that. That would drive you nuts if  you had 10 to 20% failure rate. Now I'm not talking failure in the sense that oral appliance  therapy doesn't help at all. That's quite rare. What would be more likely is that the patient's  like, hey, snoring's better. Bed partner's happy. I just don't feel that much different. I am  wearing the appliance. I swear. By the way, I didn't feel that much different on CPAP either.  My wife mentions that I also kind of have the jimmy leg. She says that that's pretty much  the same. Now that'd be nice if they threw that jimmy leg comment in for you there.  [0:24:13]  That would kind of make it easy for you. But only if you knew this, right? Only if you knew  what periodic limb movements were. So that's why we have this level is for patients that  just don't feel better for you to know just enough. Don't need to be experts in this stuff, but  just enough to ask the right questions to then have a semi-intelligent conversation with  their primary care doctor and or their sleep doctor to be able to go search the literature and  look for these things. This is why we want to know this. And importantly as well, as always  for you and your family members in this session, like in darn near every session, every  section that we talk about in Spencer Study Club, I was able to give you personal exam -  ples in my family of people that suffer with these things. Insomnia, thankfully, that's not one  that I know of any of my family members that struggle with that other than if it's related to  RLS, which is Jenny and my brother-in-law. But they wouldn't call that insomnia. They  would love to sleep. They just can't sleep due to the RLS.  [0:25:24]  If their restless legs are not bothering them, then they sleep no problem. Okay, so remem -  ber that too. Let people know in your family that you're doing things like this, that you know  things about this, and that can help you to have a conversation to help your patients feel  better. That's the point. All right. Take care. That's the point. All right. Take care.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 8   8

