SSC 2.0 - 316: Trigeminal Neuralgia  SSC 2.0   Level 3  316: Trigeminal Neuralgia  [intro music]  Trigeminal Neuralgia   [0:00:12]  Now, let me give you a little bonus content here in our enthesopathy section, and that is  about trigeminal neuralgia. Now, trigeminal neuralgia doesn't have anything to do with en -  thesopathy, but I want to kind of put this in here because this is important for me to talk  about it, and I need to put it somewhere, so I thought, yeah, what the heck, I'll put it here.  Here's the deal. As of recording this, let's see, graduated in '98, 27 years of practice, I've  seen two, I'm pretty sure, two cases of true trigeminal neuralgia. My partners and I com -  bined, less than 10 true cases of trigeminal neuralgia. Now, we see people frequently who  have been diagnosed with trigeminal neuralgia, and what that means to be diagnosed with  trigeminal neuralgia is they have a doctor tell them that they probably have trigeminal neu -  ralgia, and they're wrong the vast majority of the time, and here's how I kind of think about  it is they go to the medical doctor.  [0:01:20]  Actually, I'll give you a quick story on this. So there was a woman in eastern Idaho, that's  about five hours-ish away from Boise, and she comes and sees me. She's like 19, 20  years old, so young woman, and she'd been told that she had trigeminal neuralgia, and the  doctor had put together, and I think this happens all the time, that she had pain in her face,  and so the doctor remembers from medical school that that's trigeminal nerve, and it's  pain, that's algia, trigeminal neuralgia. Okay, you see what I did right there? Pain in the  face, pain's algia, trigeminal nerve, trigeminal neuralgia, and so they'll tell people, yeah, I  think you have trigeminal neuralgia. Okay, that sucks. So Google trigeminal neuralgia or  ask an AI app to tell you a little bit about trigeminal neuralgia, and it's not going to be fun  stuff to learn about. It's going to be pretty devastating to hear that you have trigeminal neu -  ralgia because we don't really know what causes it. I remember talking to a neurosurgeon  once and letting him know that I had treated someone with, so this is one of the two or  three patients that I've seen in my whole career that had it, and I was treating kind of local -  ly because this person had pain that was in their mouth that seemed to trigger all of this  stuff.  [0:02:53]  And with the treatments that we had done, the patient said that they were roughly 60 to  70% better with their pain, and so I called the neurosurgeon, and I said, hey, I've got this  patient, and they seem to have true trigeminal neuralgia. I've been treating kind of locally  intraorally, and this was more of a mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve, and the pa -  09 /01/25   Page   of 1   8

SSC 2.0 - 316: Trigeminal Neuralgia  tient says that they're about 60 to 70% better at this point, and the neurosurgeon actually  laughed, and I'm like, okay, why are you laughing at me, man? I'm doing my best here,  and he laughs, and he says, Jamison, I don't ever get anyone 60 to 70% better. I was like,  oh, hello. So the brain surgery that they will do, typically people will report 30 to 50% im -  provement, and that's kind of scary when you're doing brain surgery, when you're going to  the root of the nerve, and they'll put in these like Teflon sleeves, and they'll do all sorts of  crazy stuff. So let's get into our true diagnosis here so that you don't get caught into this  whole trigeminal neuralgia trap here.  [0:04:09]  So chronic pain disorder causing sudden intense facial pain, often described as an electric  shock. Very often misdiagnosed, as I just mentioned, and I'm going to skip a bullet point  and then come back. V2 is greater than V3 is greater than V1. So maxillary division of the  trigeminal nerve is going to be most common, followed by mandibular division, followed by  ophthalmic division, which can be way less common. Okay, so V2, V3, V1, going in de -  scending order of how common that is. So back to the classic symptoms here. We'll have  a trigger zone, an area, and it'll have radiating electrical sharp excruciating want to die kind  of pain. So one patient that had this, I'll never forget her, because these are so rare that it  really sticks in your mind. And this woman, poor lady, she was in a wheelchair, and she  was so sweet. And she comes in, and people with true trigeminal neuralgia know where it  hurts. They know where, if they're in touch or even the wind blows on it hard enough,  where it is. They know the spot. So I go through my normal exam and whatnot, but then  when I go to palpate up in this area to get kind of the master insertion there, she pulls  away from me and exhibits suffering, significant pain suffering. And I'm like, okay, is that  the spot?  [0:05:52]  She's like, yeah, that's the spot. So kind of right there up in my cheek area, if that's  touched or even the wind blows on it, or someone comes and gives me a hug, I don't wear  makeup in that area, I can't really touch my own face in that area, because that will nail me  and you just saw that happen. Like, okay. And then here's what you do. So I then said,  okay, I need to palpate that again. And I'm going to kind of do a little test here to see  what's going on. And I'm like, I'm so sorry to do that to you. She goes, no, I understand  and you need to figure this out, so go ahead. So I had a pen, so I'll use my pointer in place  of the pen, and I touch her right there. And pulls away and just tears and it's awful, sucks,  right? I hate causing pain, so do you. It's bad. But then here's what I do, and you may think  that this sounds crazy unless you've heard of this before. I keep touching there. Okay, just  keep tapping. While she's kind of having this pain episode here.  [0:07:04]  Now, typically with trigeminal neuralgia, that pain lasts two or three minutes and then it  goes away. So tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap. She's still suffering. She's suffering for a  couple of minutes. And then she's okay. And I'm still doing this. Okay, still tapping. No pain.  I keep doing that for a few minutes. No pain returns. I stop. Then we just talk a little bit and  I'm letting it reset. So you see there on the fourth bullet point, takes a few minutes for it to  09 /01/25   Page   of 2   8

SSC 2.0 - 316: Trigeminal Neuralgia  recharge. So we just talk, making some notes, not touching her. Give it three or four min -  utes, and then I go back, bang, starts it all over again. That is how you diagnose trigeminal  neuralgia. And it is super duper rare for neurologists even to do that. And it would be un -  heard of, in my experience, for primary care doctors or anyone else to do this. So you  need to know how to do this. You will have people in your career that are told they have  trigeminal neuralgia, and it is 100% for sure not trigeminal neuralgia. It is pain in the area  of the trigeminal nerve, is all it is.  [0:08:23]  So you could sort of call any TMJ problem trigeminal neuralgia, because it is pain in the  division of the trigeminal nerve, but that's not what trigeminal neuralgia is. So in general,  it's pretty rare to see true trigeminal neuralgia in your practice, but if you go through this,  and you go through, and you find that trigger zone, you find that area, then got some op -  tions. And historically, and on SSC 1.0, I would have told you to refer to a neurologist that's  probably going to end up being treated medically, and then possibly they are going to send  to a neurosurgeon, perhaps, and do surgery. But now I want to talk about use of PRF in  trigeminal neuralgia, because it's really, really exciting, actually. So to just remind us of our  anatomy here, we have our ophthalmic division, maxillary division, and mandibular divi -  sion. As I just had on the last slide, it's typically believed that it is V2, it's a little bit more  than V3, more than V1. However, as you'll see in a second, some studies will say V3, V2,  V1. So V2, V3, this is where trigeminal neuralgia typically lives. V1 sometimes, but V3, V2,  this is going to be where you're going to see this the vast majority of the time.  2023 Literature   [0:09:51]  So let's look at a little bit of the literature of this study from 2023, talking about use of  platelet-rich plasma for trigeminal neuralgia. And the first part here, and you can kind of  just pause this and read this if you'd like, but it just gives a little history of platelet-rich  plasma and what it is and things like that, and talks about that. Then this next little para -  graph here, and of course, we have all of these studies in the library where you can go  and the full text of all of these articles is in there as a reminder. Hopefully you know that by  now, but just remember you can always go in and get the full text. So trigeminal neuralgia,  I'll go ahead and read this, affects basic human health aspects such as infill psychological,  physical, and social behavior. Okay, why is that? It's because it is unbelievably painful and  people know what causes it. They know where if they are touched that it's going to cause  this unbelievable pain reaction. So if you knew that too, you would change all sorts of stuff  and you would kind of think about it all the time, which super sucks.  [0:11:06]  So they're not going to get touched on the face, and it's such a big deal, right? So it's not  just the wearing makeup or being careful with clothing or stuff like that. It's like giving  someone a hug. People with this would be very, very cautious or maybe wouldn't even let  09 /01/25   Page   of 3   8

SSC 2.0 - 316: Trigeminal Neuralgia  anyone get near them just perchance that that person going in to give them a hug might  brush their cheek or something like that. Very sad, right? So it says it's mainly detected by  simply touching one's face or during mouth movements. So I have seen like one person, I  mentioned that earlier, that had the trigger zone was in their mouth and that person we did  help quite a bit. And all of that was pre-what I'm talking about now. So we did not know to  use this technique with PRF back then. Still got them some better. Now, again, as you're  about to see, with PRF, we can really take that up to another level. So as all these effects  were reported in epidemiological studies that have evidenced increased number of anxiety,  depression, insomnia cases in patients affected by trigeminal neuralgia.  [0:12:17]  Imagine that too, that you've got this trigger area on your face or in your mouth, and now  you're trying to sleep. So that means you could only sleep on one side ever. You could  never roll over. And if it's in your mouth, even worse, then you could trigger this in your  sleep without any conscious notion of that I did something. So let's look at how PRP and  PRF can help this. So in this study, they did PRP injections, and they called it trigeminal  nerve microsurgery to help enhance nerve repair. So they use the PRP as part of this  treatment. At the top, and you're probably aware of this already or in the PRF section, PRF  lecture, we talk about this, that it's used in osteoarthritis and diabetic neuropathy and in -  teresting dental pain. Now, the fact that this study quotes that it's used in dental pain may  be kind of more TMJ type of pain than what you think of as odontalgia. Nevertheless, it is  being used for all sorts of dental reasons. So then this talking about the emphasis on  trigeminal neuralgia.  [0:13:41]  So let's kind of look at this a little bit. So what they did is they injected the PRP close to the  root of the trigeminal nerve and/or at the most painful sites. So the trigger areas, things like  that, they would inject. They would either do that extraorally or intraorally, whichever made  sense. So as this is part of your injections outside the deep dark hole, then you could go  outside. But going back to your normal dental anesthesiology anatomy, you know how to  do the infraorbital nerve intraorally, and you probably would do that because you've done  that before. So you could access, as we talk about way back in level one in the anatomy  there, you could hit the V2 root through the greater palatine foramen. That would be one of  the easiest ways to do that would be through the greater palatine foramen because you  know you're going to be in the right spot. So kind of think through that anatomy of how  could I put the platelet-rich fibrin or well, we're going to use fibrin now, so PRF in these ar -  eas. Okay, so despite the significant pain intensity levels analyzed by several researchers  and assessed based on the main visual analog scale, PRP treatment has evidenced grad -  ual pain relief after its application. And then here's the cool part, until full pain rule out at  the third observation month.  [0:15:04]  So they did this procedure, the PRP, the patient felt better, better, better, and at three  months, pain gone. Wow. So compare that to brain surgery, where they would go in and  put a little Teflon sleeve in the nerve and do different things like that and balloons and vari -  09 /01/25   Page   of 4   8

SSC 2.0 - 316: Trigeminal Neuralgia  ous stuff like that. They would never get, well, never is too strong of a word, they would  almost never get full pain relief. And with this, they are. Okay, continuing on, the outcome  remained unchanged up to the sixth follow-up month. In other words, PRP therapy applied  to trigeminal neuralgia cases is a promising strategy to help mitigating the significant level  of pain associated with this special medical condition. So unbelievably exciting for this  condition that has historically had very few things that you could do.  Another Study   [0:16:00]  Another study, it's recent as of me recording this in 2025, gives a little history here on  trigeminal neuralgia. I don't think I mentioned that it's also called tic douloureux. So that's  just kind of a thing for you to be aware of that other name, tic douloureux. You look at the  prevalence there, 0.16 to 0.3% of people. So not insignificant number of people going to  have this in our communities. Historically don't end up at the TMJ guy's office. Sometimes  they do because they're sent in by dentists or whatever. Sometimes they are sent by  physicians, but often these folks are going to be at the neurologist's office and then the  neurosurgeon that I talked about before. Okay, kind of goes over all the stuff we've talked  about already. So let's see what they did in this case. So here's kind of a flow chart of what  they did and how they did it and the spin times and things like that. This is again PRP.  Remember the difference between PRP and PRF is that anticoagulant that they use in  PRP. And just in case you're thinking this, it's like, oh, well, this stuff's on PRP. I wonder if  that would work better than PRF. Almost assuredly not. PRF in virtually all other settings  works better than PRP, but both are awesome. So if you had a choice of nothing or PRP,  you're doing PRP. Actually, though, PRF is easier, less complicated, and we're getting bet -  ter results. So we're just going to move to that. But don't be surprised that a lot of the evi -  dence in the field is PRP-related. It's been around a little longer, and it's just more com -  monly used than PRF.  [0:17:49]  Now, on this side over here, and my pointer over here, so here's kind of our flowchart of  the 10 patients that were in it. They were randomly allocated to one of two groups. In  group one, they just gave them carbamazepine or brand name Tegretol. So that's very  common to put people on these medications. Talking about that for a moment with patients  that I've treated over the years, those are tough drugs. Super sedating, and they're not  specific, right? So it's kind of like when people talk about, well, being put on a muscle re -  laxant. There's no such thing as a muscle relaxant, per se. It's just kind of a sedative. And  if it's relaxing your muscles, then it's relaxing all of them, right? It's not just like focused on  your low back or something like that. So people tend to be very sedated, and that makes  life difficult for them. It makes it hard to drive, makes it hard to work, makes it hard to do  things. Tegretol and Neurontin and these other nerve-specific drugs are kind of the same  09 /01/25   Page   of 5   8

SSC 2.0 - 316: Trigeminal Neuralgia  way, that they are going to reduce the reactivity, if you will, of those nerves. So they have  their place, obviously, but it can be pretty tough.  [0:19:01]  So the typical medical management of trigeminal neuralgia would be to put you on some -  thing like Tegretol and just hopefully that reduces your pain. Now, the patients that I've  seen over the years, oftentimes they have to keep upping their dose to get the same ef -  fect. I had one patient once that was on a staggering dose of Tegretol. Like normally it's  like a couple hundred milligrams a day, and this guy was on like almost 3,000 milligrams a  day. And it just kept going up, up, up, up, up, up, up in order for him to get the same level  of improvement, which wasn't that good in the first place. He said that on his best days on  the medications, he was maybe 50% better than if he wasn't on the medication. But you'll  take 50% if you're having excruciating pain. Okay, so that's group one, medical manage -  ment. Group two, medical management plus the PRP injections. Interesting. So I'm not  aware of a study that's been done yet. Hopefully these same authors will do this, but it  seems like it would have been cool to have a third group or another group where they  didn't do the meds at all.  [0:20:11]  So they do one group with the Tegretol and the PRP injections. As you see in the little box  there, they had a PRP injection once a week for three weeks, and then they follow up after  four weeks. So that would have given them the three weeks for the injections and four  weeks, whereas the other group just has the medication. So what did they find? Let me go  ahead and read this couple sentences from the study from the authors here. ‘After six  months of giving treatment, trigeminal neuralgia symptoms were completely absent in  group two, the one with the PRP, confirming that it's a better treatment as compared to giv -  ing only Tegretol group one, as out of the five in the Tegretol group, three still had their  trigeminal neuralgia symptoms’. Now, that said another way, is that two of the five in group  one did significantly better, and they imply that they didn't have those symptoms anymore.  So that's cool. So that's a good outcome. The question mark remains, though, do they  have to stay on the drug? Because normally they do. Whereas in group two, I believe they  were able to get off of the drug, or at least that's what we've seen in our clinical experi -  ence.  [0:21:19]  Okay, that's, it can be said that the treatment modality of administering PRP as an adjunct  with carbamazepine has a better response. Obvious question then to come from this  would be, did we need the Tegretol at all? I would say that we probably didn't, but this is  what they did. So they both on the drug, and then one, you just add the PRP so that you  can tell, okay, is it the drug? Is it the PRP? Is it placebo? Is it whatever? So I like the study.  So again, the rest of that here, pretty cool stuff, and I'm sure that these authors are also  looking at, well, what if we just do the PRP?  09 /01/25   Page   of 6   8

SSC 2.0 - 316: Trigeminal Neuralgia  PRP in Nerve Repair   [0:21:57]  And then lastly, this is a review of using PRP in nerve repair, so not specific to trigeminal  neuralgia, but just using it when nerves are damaged and they're microsuturing or putting  things back together and then putting PRP all over the repaired nerve and having tremen -  dous effects with that. So just really, really exciting stuff. The more we're learning about  harnessing the body's healing ability and concentrating it and sticking it in an area and re -  ally kind of just turning back the hands of time in that area, making the repair, the healing  more youthful, if you will, by concentrating those growth factors and whatnot, the more  we're learning of how amazing it is.  Trigeminal Neuralgia Story   [0:22:46]  And I want to kind of end this trigeminal neuralgia discussion with a story. So this man, this  was a couple years ago, and I went to church and I saw this guy at our congregation, and  he had this tape on his face, this black duct tape, basically. I think it's technically gorilla  tape, if I remember correctly. And I saw him talking to someone else in our congregation  who happens to be a dentist, also happens to be a member of Spencer Study Club. And  afterwards, I was like, hey what's up with that guy with the tape on his face? That's kind of  weird. And it was taped just like this. And this man was suffering from what sounded like  trigeminal neuralgia, but then a little bit of an atypical aspect of it.  [0:23:39]  But remember when I was going through the trigeminal neuralgia and telling you about the  kind of tap, tap, tap, tap, tap. So think about that. If you were to put tape, if you were to put  something on that trigger area, then maybe it would constantly stimulate it so that you  wouldn't then have the reset and re-triggering of that trigger. And that's what he found out.  So he had tried everything. He had been suffering with this for years, had really affected  his life poorly, obviously, this would anybody, and had come to the point where he's like  taping his face all the time. And can you imagine going through life like that and trying to  be a normal person in society when you've got duct tape on your face every day? No, that  would be terrible, wouldn't it? So I reached out and I talked to the gentleman because I'm  like, hey, this is super strange. Let me talk to him. And we had a really, really cool conver -  sation. And we went through everything. And at the end, it was like, yeah, that does sound  very similar to classic trigeminal neuralgia. And the medications that he tried really hadn't  helped and all the different things that he had tried and the doctors had tried with him had  not helped. This was the only thing that helped was the tape. And it didn't make it neces -  sarily completely go away, but it helped quite a bit.  [0:25:03]  09 /01/25   Page   of 7   8

SSC 2.0 - 316: Trigeminal Neuralgia  And so after having a conversation with him, I talked to his dentist, Ron, and I was like,  hey, Ron, why don't we try PRF? Can't hurt. And so he did. So he did PRF treatment and  you see that this is V2, like we talked about, and with some V3 there. And he basically  went to the areas of the most painful trigger areas and deposited PRF into those areas.  And just a little while ago, Ron followed up with the patient and found out that the patient is  now pain-free. Gone. With PRF. Amazing stuff. Can you imagine? I know I like to talk  about ripple effects.  [0:25:59]  Can you imagine the ripple effects that are caused by that? And that made me feel just like  unbelievably grateful to have Frank Henrich in our group teach me about PRF and these  things and how it could be used and for us to learn about it and then to put on courses and  for Ron to be a member of Spencer Study Club because of us connecting and him learn -  ing how to do PRF. And he was already doing blood draws and things and sedation and  stuff, so he's very familiar with all of this stuff. And so he really took to it quickly because  he's comfortable with those things. And for him to then have this person that's suffering  tremendously and to be able to help him relieve his pain with this thing that a few years  ago we didn't even know about. It's really, really exciting stuff. So watch the PRF presenta -  tion too. You might need to watch that multiple times, that lecture. Learn this if you haven't  yet. And so far, knock on wood, we don't have too many contraindications to PRF. That's  one of the beauties of PRF, even versus PRP. PRP has that anticoagulant in it, so it has  something in it that's not natural. It's not you, where PRF doesn't. So the odds of there be -  ing reactions, the odds of there being problems like that are very, very slim. And there's  others who have had now success treating these pain disorders that historically, again, if  you've been with Spencer Study Club for a number of years and you watch the same thing  about trigeminal neuralgia five years ago, I would have said “Refer”.  [0:27:56]  And that would have been it. That's all that we could have done. There were things we  were trying to do. There's laser, there's acupuncture, there's things like that. And we could  sometimes give people a little bit of relief, and that was to them virtually a miracle to have  any relief at all. Well, now we're getting to the level where our experience as well as the  experience published in the literature is talking about getting rid of the pain, which is so  exciting because this has been treated historically as a central nervous system issue, a  brain-in-your-brain issue and it appears to be more peripheral, which is exciting because  we can more easily treat the periphery than we can the central nervous system. Okay, so  cool story. Go out, learn your stuff. That is another injection outside the deep dark hole  there, our enthesis. We talked about all that. Again, threw in kind of the trigeminal neural -  gia as a bonus there. That's not about enthesis necessarily, but just about nerve involve -  ment in general. And with PRF being a primary treatment in all of these things, make sure  you learn how to do it. All right, take care.  [outro music]  09 /01/25   Page   of 8   8

