SSC 2.0 - 108: What's That Clicking? Part 2  SSC 2.0   Level 1  108: What's That Clicking? Part 2  [intro music]  Discal Dislocation without Reduction - Treatment   [0:00:12]  Okay, so what are we gonna do? Well, we're going to try to get them back on the disc.  That's what we're gonna try to do. So, if it's acute, if it hasn't been going on for five years,  then you can try to do what we call an unlocking procedure. On the timing there, so acute  normally we think of as relatively short, right? So a few weeks to a couple months, that  would be acute, and then anything longer than that we would consider chronic. So, my  world record is I got a patient unlocked who'd been locked for two years. My partner, Dr.  Kevin Mangelson, had one that was almost three years. Cameron, his was also longer  than two years, his world record. Having said that, all three of us have had patients that  have been locked for a month or two that we've not been able to get unlocked. So time is  of the essence. We want to get these people as fast as possible, but we'll still try. People  that have been locked for more than a year, depending on what we see on the MRI. If on  the MRI we see no arthritic breakdown of the   condyle, if we see the disc, it looks like it's in  good shape, but in the wrong spot, that's a good candidate.  [0:01:14]  On the other hand, if they've been locked from their history for years, we get the MRI and  the disc looks terrible and there's already arthritic breakdown, that's way less likely that  we're going to be able to get them back on the disc, still might try. If that was my wife, I  would still try. If that was my kid, I'd still try. But it's just less likely that we're going to get  them back on the disc.  Reduction (“Unlocking”) Technique - TMJ Injection Technique   [0:01:42]  So, here's our unlocking technique. So jaw joint injection first. So, if you palpate right here  on your jaw joint and open, you fall into a little hole there, that's where we're going to do  this. Now, by the time you're watching this video, we have likely already implemented ul -  trasound guided injections into the jaw joint. As I am shooting this video, some of our first  training in this has recently occurred with our Business Elite group being the first people to  receive that training. So, probably by the time that you're watching this, unless, again, by  then I've decided, no, that's silly, but I don't think that's what I'm going to decide.  [0:02:23]  09/01/25   Page   of 1   17

SSC 2.0 - 108: What's That Clicking? Part 2  So, probably now there is a course that you can take from where we teach you how to do  this injection using ultrasound guidance. The first person who taught us that was an inter -  ventional radiologist. They do almost everything through ultrasound guidance. Historically,  we've just done it by touch, and I'll explain why this joint lends itself to just being done by  touch and knowledge of anatomy. So, here's our goal is to get that needle into the joint  capsule. So, here's our anatomy two, and what's this thing here? Marked as number 35.  Yep, that's the parotid gland. How about all the stuff there in 33, 31, 26? That's the facial  nerve. So your facial nerve goes through the parotid gland and goes out across your face  to what? Muscles of facial expression. So, if you are superficial and you get the anesthetic  outside the capsule superficially, it's possible and possibly even likely that you would get  some either in parotid gland itself or that you would just hit a couple branches of the facial  nerve. If you get it in the parotid gland, then it could go through the parotid gland and you  could give them complete unilateral facial paralysis where they can't move one side of  their face at all.  [0:03:47]  The other side would be fine, and that would be because you got anesthetic into the  parotid. It kind of moved around and got all the branches of the facial nerve. What's a little  more common is that they can still move the lower part of their face, but they can't close  their eye. So, a orbicularis oculi is going to be one of those branches that you might catch  if you're superficial. So, we try not to be superficial because that's no fun when you do that.  No big deal, though. So you use, excuse me, I just about said market. You use Carbo -  caine, you use a short-acting anesthetic for the unlocking procedure. One of the reasons  we use a short-acting anesthetic is, one, we don't need long anesthetic. We just need it to  be there for a little bit while we are doing the unlocking procedure. But two is in case you  do get the facial nerve, you don't want to have their eye tape shut for seven hours. You'd  rather have them coming back online in 30 minutes. So, that's why we use Carbocaine or  some short-acting anesthetic. So, that would be if you're too superficial. If you're too deep,  if you go either through the capsule or just behind the neck of the condyle, deep, then  you're going to give a reverse Gow Gates, I call it.  [0:05:00]  So, a Gow Gates injection, you're going way up neck of the condyle to get the mandibular  division of the trigeminal nerve. You could do the same thing from exterior. So, I mentioned  a second ago that we recently did the ultrasound training, and I volunteered to be the one  to be injected. And so the interventional radiologist was kind of showing the whole group  there. We had it all blown up on a big TV, and I'm just laying there, and they're kind of find -  ing the spot in the joint, and then one of my friends did the injection. And I'm pretty sure he  was in the capsule because I did have a little change in my occlusion. That's going to be  one of the things we're looking for here. If you're in the capsule, then it's kind of like you've  created a retro discitis. Don't take that literally. We didn't create an inflammation of the jaw  joint. It's kind of like that in that there's a posterior open bite because we put fluid in the  joint. Okay, so, that's how we know we're in the capsule. So, I think he was, but then I think  09/01/25   Page   of 2   17

SSC 2.0 - 108: What's That Clicking? Part 2  he actually pushed a little farther and got out of the capsule, got deeper, and injected  some anesthetic.  [0:06:09]  And so then my lip and everything got numb. My tongue got numb. So, it was just like an  inferior alveolar nerve block or a Gow-Gates just from the outside. Speaking of which, that  might be a cool little technique for you to know, right? If you ever have somebody that can't  open all the way or they've got an infection or whatever on the inside and you're like, crap,  I need to get them numb. How do I do this? Because they've got a big old inflammation  here in their mouth, or that can't get them open enough to do a normal inferior alveolar  nerve block. That's how. So, you would kind of do a joint injection, except not in the joint.  You would go right behind the condyle, get your 27 long in there, reverse Gow Gates.  Cool, right? That's not taught in Malamed's textbook. Heard it here first. So that's, let me  go through that anatomy again. If you're too superficial and you used anesthetic, so this is  assuming you used anesthetic. When we're doing PRF injections, this is why we're now  teaching ultrasound-guided injections is because with PRF, we don't know. With PRF, the  only anatomic indicator we're going to have that you were in the capsule was that their bite  changed, that we filled up with some fluid there.  [0:07:14]  But if they're superficial, we're not going to notice anything. It's not going to have an effect  on the facial nerve. If we're deep, it's not going to have an effect on the inferior alveolar  nerve. But with an anesthetic, it will. So, as you're doing this, I would encourage you to,  you know, even if you're using ultrasound guidance, you still need to know your anatomy,  right? So, use ultrasound guidance and you're like, "Yeah, I'm pretty sure I'm in the jaw  joint." You do the anesthetic. If they can't blink, you are superficial. If their lip gets numb,  then you were deep. If you were right, then their bite is off. Okay, so that's all the anatomy  there. All right, so here's how we do it. So we wipe off the area with alcohol, or you can  use iodine. We spray the cold spray as a topical anesthetic just to make it so that the nee -  dle poke doesn't hurt too bad. 27 long is what I like to use. There's a lot of people that do  this with a 30-gauge needle. I just like the feel of a 27 better.  [0:08:10]  You will usually, but not always, feel yourself going through the capsule. Your goal is to  bonk the back of the condyle. That doesn't always happen, but it should happen. If you  kind of look at your skull here, you should hit the condyle if you are in the capsule. If you  don't hit the condyle and you're deep, you're probably past it. If you instantly hit bone,  that's not the condyle either. That's probably the temporal bone and part of the temporal  bone's zygomatic arch, right? That's probably what you're hitting. You need to redirect and  go down a little bit in order to get in there.  After the Injection(s)   [0:08:49]  09/01/25   Page   of 3   17

SSC 2.0 - 108: What's That Clicking? Part 2  Okay, so that's the shot. Right. After the injection, ask the patient if their bite feels different.  It should. Why? Because you just put 1.7, 1.8 cc's of fluid in there. Or if you did this with  PRF, you're probably putting 1 to 2 cc of PRF into the joint. That's going to fill up the joint.  Condyle can't seat all the way, so they will have a post or open bite on that side. Ask the  patient to move their jaw side to side and open wide while you leave the room.  [0:09:15]  So, I always leave the room after this. Why that is is a little bit of a psychological thing. So,  the patient was probably nervous about getting this shot. Now you gave the shot, and  they're like, well, that wasn't so bad. And now you're gone. So if you're out of the room,  they're not scared of you throwing some surprise chiropractic move on them. And they'll  move around, and as I put on this slide here, 50% to 70% of the time, they pop back on.  Usually you don't have to touch them. If you get them in the capsule, so the reason I think  that this injection is important is we get a hydraulic effect, hydraulic effect, where they  move. Remember, you can't compress liquid, that's hydraulics. So, they're moving around.  That fluid's kind of flushing around. They move just right and pop them back on. That is the  whole goal.  If Not…   [0:10:09]  Now there are some gentle manipulation techniques like your classic dental school tech -  nique, which was not designed to get someone back on the disc. It was designed to get  their condyle back into the fossa after they've opened up too wide. Nevertheless, that can  still help in this case to kind of distract the condyle, move them. I'll usually move them to  the other side. So assisted opening, assisted lateral motion. So, assisted opening is kind  of tough to show on the camera here. That's assisted opening. Assisted lateral would be if  they were locked on the right side, I would push their jaw to the other side, trying to bring  them medial and anterior. Because remember, the disc is medial. It's displaced medially  and anterior. So, I'm going to, that's the same goal. That's usually how we'll pop them.  Sometimes it's the vertical, usually it's just kind of the side. And then there's also things  you can put in between their teeth. My friend Dwight Romrell puts a cotton roll on a tongue  depressor, and he'll use that and have them kind of roll. That's a really nice technique too.  What if They Don’t Unlock? - Dental School Answers   [0:11:19]  Okay, what if they don't unlock? All right, dental school answers. Because you suck as a  dentist and your margin is open. Now for those of you who graduated, you know, maybe in  the 2000-teens or 2020s, you may not even get this joke. Because I think maybe you had  a different experience in dental school where they had to become all nice and weren't  quite as mean anymore.   It's funny, when I mentioned before I gave a lecture to this fixed  09/01/25   Page   of 4   17

SSC 2.0 - 108: What's That Clicking? Part 2  prosthodontics group, and one of my professors was there, and I kind of made this joke. I  said at one point that, you know, I was taught in dental school that if something didn't work,  it's because you suck as a dentist. And I made a little joke on that and got a big laugh with  the whole crowd. They all got it. And then it was hilarious because this professor walks out  into the hall after my lecture, and the first thing he said after he introduced himself, be -  cause I didn't recognize him because he looks 100 years old at this point, not really, but he  looked a lot different than I remember him because I've been out of school for 26 years.  And he says, "I'm sorry you had such a traumatic experience there in dental school." And  again, we had a big laugh about that.  Real Answers   [0:12:35]  Okay, so the real answers are though, sometimes they don't unlock. And sometimes they  aren't locked in the first place. Get an MRI. Make sure you know what you're treating be -  fore you're trying to treat it. I've had so many people in Spencer Study Club that will be  like, I tried this and I can't get them unlocked.   And I'll be like, "Did you get an MRI? Well,  no they didn't want to get an MRI or it was going to be, you know, a hassle or whatever.  And like, well, how do you know that they're locked? Well, because, and they'll give me the  history and the history makes you think that they're locked. We don't know for sure that  they're locked. So, I've had patients where I've done that. Almost everything, if I haven't  mentioned this yet, almost everything I teach is from personal experience of doing it  wrong. If you want to do it wrong, feel free. If you would like to rather learn from my mis -  takes and the mistakes of others in Spencer Study Club and avoid making the mistakes  yourself, just learn from ours. That's what I would do if I were you. But I made up a lot of  this stuff from being taught from some of my mentors. But like, I never was taught how to  do joint injections. I had to figure that out on my own. My first joint injection was on myself,  believe it or not. Okay, so anyway, I had a patient once and the history, everything made  sense that she had a non-reducing disc displacement.  [0:13:49]  And I tried the unlocking procedure and it didn't work. And I tried again, it didn't work. And  finally, I'm like, this doesn't make any sense. I sent her for an MRI. The disc was in the  right spot the whole time. Okay, it was always in the right spot. She just had kind of a little  bit of a trismus. And we got her to physical therapy, got her stretched open. Everything  was cool. Speaking of physical therapy, you do not want to have these people go to physi -  cal therapist or a chiropractor if they're off the disc because the physical therapist or chiro -  practor will stretch them further off the disc without getting them back on the disc. Okay, so  that is the real answers here. Then what? So, if we've tried to get them unlocked and we  couldn't, then we might give them a little time and try again. We'll usually give them a  week. Get the MRI if you haven't already. arthrocentesis, we'll talk more about in a second.  But a really, really big factor here is be ready for when it pops. Use of an aqualizer is better  09/01/25   Page   of 5   17

SSC 2.0 - 108: What's That Clicking? Part 2  than nothing because what we want to try to do here is avoid the patient getting on their  back teeth.  Temporary Splint   [0:14:49]  Okay, that's kind of the key here. But better than the aqualizer is a thermoplastic splint.  Now, very soon we will be printing these, maybe, but maybe not. So, the problem with  printing a splint for unlocking procedure is one, we need it right this second, not an hour  from now. But two is we can't predict how thick it's going to be until we've done the unlock -  ing procedure and some of that thickness is due to fluid that's still in the joint. Okay, so the  temporary splint technique that I'm about to show you is something we've done now for 20  plus years and I don't see anything better than this on the horizon actually. So, even as we  become sophisticated with printing and stuff like that in office and printers get better and  faster and whatever, probably still this will be best for a long time. Now, you could do this  temporary splint and then print one if you wanted to, but as we'll talk about in a second,  the temporary splint, as the name implies, is temporary, so we don't necessarily need  something in there a long time. So, this is to make sure that they are on the disc.  [0:16:01]  So, the key part of doing the unlocking procedure is that if they have a non-reducing disc  displacement, what do they need to do in order for you to know that they are back on the  disc? I'll let you think about that for a second. So, non-reducing disc displacement, you've  done the shot, you've done whatever, what is going to indicate to you that it's been suc -  cessful? Now you're probably saying, well, they open bigger. True, but what else? They  open bigger and what? Or let me give you a hint. If they open bigger and then they  brought their teeth back together, what would theoretically happen? Okay, did you just say,  well, they'd get back off the disc again? Right. So, what you're looking for is clicking. You're  trying to take them from a non-reducing disc displacement back to a reducing disc dis -  placement. Okay? With the temporary splint, we're going to take them to a normal joint po -  sition, normal condyle joint relationship, condyle-disc relationship. But our goal with the un -  locking is non-reducing to reducing. So, I'll always ask this when I have friends and stuff.  They're like, "Yeah, I do this, and it unlocks them." Do they click afterwards?  [0:17:10]  And usually they'll be like, well, you know, no, they open bigger. Well, then they're not back  on the disc. So by definition, they have to click, okay, or, so if they open bigger and they  can get their teeth together, they're not on the disc. Because remember, we haven't gone  from non-reducing to normal. That's no way is that going to happen without a change in  their bite. So, non-reducing to reducing disc displacement. Does that make sense? Okay, if  that doesn't make sense, post to Spencer Study Club or shoot me an email or something  to help that make sense. Go back and watch those videos again. Remember, there's a big  difference between non-reducing, reducing, and normal. That condyle is in a completely  09/01/25   Page   of 6   17

SSC 2.0 - 108: What's That Clicking? Part 2  different position. The condyle is in the same position, reducing and non-reducing. Re -  member that condyle is way up there in the fossa, no room. The only difference between  reducing and non-reducing is reducing clicks. Reducing is in place sometime. Non-reduc -  ing is never in place. But that's not a difference in the bite. Not a difference in that condylar  position. When you take them from non-reducing back to reducing, that's your goal with an  unlocking procedure. They've got to click.  Patient Education   [0:18:15]  So, if they're clicking, you then take them through and help them understand, I'm on the  disc, I can open fully, I'm off the disc, I can't open, my jaw goes to the side, I've got to wig -  gle, pop open. So, educating the patient is the most important thing. But making this tem -  porary splint is huge. So, this is what the temporary splint looks like. Extremely important  that you educate the patient on when they're on the disc or off the disc. You can't just  completely depend on the splint. Okay. We have the patient call the next morning. They  return in a week for follow-up. Patient's educated on using this temporary device. And then  we go from there to help them not have this problem recur. Sometimes that is full splint  therapy. Nowadays that would be PRF would be part of this to help heal those tissues,  tighten things up. Might be a night guard, might be a sleep appliance, whatever. So, this  would be kind of, we'll talk about this more down the road, but the splints that we might  use to help them long-term. Let's go over the temporary splint fabrication. So, with ther -  moplastic, you can use the white thermoplastic, which is kind of the original Thermacryl  from the Airway Management Incorporation or the TAP company.  Thermal Plastic Temporary Splint Fabrication   [0:19:28]  Or you could use Thermacryl Plus, which is a gray color. We usually use the white stuff.  The handling properties of it are a little bit better for this. It does take longer to set up.  People also prefer that it's white instead of the grayish color. So, all you're going to do is  you're going to warm this up. You can either warm it up in the microwave or you can warm  it up with hot water. You're going to put some in your hand. You're going to make this into a  splint live. Stick it on the patient's teeth, have them close down, and note that Jenny in this  example here, she's closing edge to edge because in this example I'm giving here, that  would be the spot that she is in centric relation. That would be the spot that she's on the  disc. Remember, centric relation on the disc. So, we've got her from non-reducing to re -  ducing. So now she's popping. And then I notice that I can have her open on the disc,  close forward, open, close, open, close, stays on the disc. That's where we make that ini -  tial position. We then just trim it up.   And then critical here is we're going to have her open,  close, open, close, open, close. Make sure she stays on the disc. Take it out, have her  09/01/25   Page   of 7   17

SSC 2.0 - 108: What's That Clicking? Part 2  close down her back teeth. That should make her go off the disc again. Pop, pop, pop. Put  it in, open, pop on, close, stays on. Super duper duper critical. You could make this whole  thing and they're off the disc and they leave your office off the disc with the temperance  wind in the mouth. So, just making the splint doesn't make them on the disc. You need to  educate them. You need to know that they're on the disc.  What About Arthrocentesis?   [0:20:57]  So, what about arthrocentesis? So if these patients end up at the oral surgeon's office,  they're going to get arthrocentesis where they get their joint flushed out and usually a  bunch of steroid stuck in the joint, which I don't love anymore and haven't loved that for a  long time. But that's what they're going to do. Now the literature on this says that it almost  never works. So, in this study from years and years and years ago, 85 patients, and it said  on the results, all discs showed anterior disc displacement without reduction before treat -  ment.  [0:21:24]  So, they were all non-reducing displacement. Only 10% of the joints became anterior disc  displacement with reduction after treatment. In other words, 90% stayed off the disc. And  there's another study showed the exact same thing. This was also 2006, 28 patients. They  found going to this here, 28% preoperatively to 25% postoperatively. So, they went from  non-reducing displacement to reducing displacement 10% of the time. Not great, right?  90% of the time, they're still off the disc. However, I think this is for one big reason, and  that is that the surgeons don't do the temporary splint. If you talk to an oral surgeon, I've  talked to many oral surgeons, oral surgeons are smart. They know what's going on in the  jaw joint. They're not, like, wondering what's going on here. If you ask them, "Hey, when  you do an arthrocentesis, does the patient typically pop back on the disc?" They'll say,  "Oh, 100%." Absolutely. Okay, I get them. Pop! I get them on the disc. They know what  they're doing anatomically. But then what don't they do? Well, the temporary splint. So,  then what happens when the patient bites down? They're back off the disc.  [0:22:41]  So, typically, that patient was on the disc, and then by the time they're in their car to leave,  they're back off the disc. And historically, a very common thing to do was the patient would  have the arthrocentesis, and then they would go straight to physical therapy. They did this  in Boise for years. So, they'd flush out the joint, manipulate them, whatever, send them to  PT. For certain, by the time they're at the physical therapist's office, they're off the disc.  The physical therapist, in this case that I'm telling you about, was knowledgeable about the  disc displacement. But even then, he's not likely to pop them back on the disc. And even if  he did, he's not going to make them a temporary splint either. So, the temporary splint re -  ally is the big deal. Now, those studies I showed from a long time ago showed that this not  very effective. So, this was a systematic review looking at arthrocentesis or splint therapy,  09/01/25   Page   of 8   17

SSC 2.0 - 108: What's That Clicking? Part 2  not together, but arthrocentesis or splint therapy. If you go down to the results here, you  see that it's like, eh, seemed to be okay. And the conclusion shows effective results in  terms of increase in mouth opening and reduction of pain.  [0:23:50]  Well, you would expect that, that they're going to open bigger, and then they put steroid in  as part of the arthrocentesis, so that would reduce the pain as well. So, as of 2023, this  article, surgeons are still going to be doing this, but they're not going to be doing the tem -  porary splint. So, this is where you can come in to your local surgeons that you already  work with and talk to them about this, and they're going to agree. Again, they know the  anatomy. You're not going to have to be teaching them the anatomy. So if you say, "Hey, I  know you do arthrocentesis in these cases. Here's what I'm doing to help get them back  on the disc." Probably they're going to stop doing arthrocentesis. They're just going to refer  those patients to you.  NRDD Keys to Success   [0:24:40]  All right, so to wrap up here, non-reducing disc displacement, keys to success. Number  one, most important, always accurate diagnosis. Get your MRI. Make sure that that per -  son's actually off the disc. Number two, good technique. Number three, that you can actu -  ally reduce them. So, if they've been locked for 20 years, very unlikely you're going to get  them back on the disc.   Number four, immediate treatment to stabilize and reduce the disc.  So, you've got to have that temporary splint. And number five, follow up with appropriate  long-term care, whatever that needs to be.  NRDD Recap   [0:25:01]  As another recap here, to go back to our diagnosis, acute non-reducing disc displacement,  remember 26 millimeters entrance size of opening. Remember deflection to the affected  side. History of my jaw used to click. History of my jaw used to catch. History of, you know,  it hasn't clicked or popped since I woke up two weeks ago with it locked. Okay, that's going  to be typical. We are going to unlock them. I want you to learn how to do this. This is super  important that you learn how to do this unless your country, I don't think there's a state in  the United States that doesn't allow this, but if your country doesn't allow you to give a joint  injection, then that's a problem. But learn how to do this. We need you doing this. Make  darn sure these people don't go to physical therapy or chiropractors before you get them  back on the disc. Otherwise, they just get pushed farther out of the disc. In my experience,  people that have been to physical therapy or chiropractor with an acute non-reducing dis -  placement, the odds of me getting them unlocked are dramatically reduced.  [0:26:02]  09/01/25   Page   of 9   17

SSC 2.0 - 108: What's That Clicking? Part 2  Okay, time is of the essence. And then also, again, when they're 26 millimeters, that's a  good sign because that means they're just kind of acutely stuck. You put in the anesthetic,  get that hydraulic effect and pop them back on. If they're opening in the 30s, still deflecting  and all the history makes sense, and they say, yeah, I've been going to the physical thera -  pist, yeah, I've been going to the chiropractor for two months, and my opening's getting  bigger, but I still feel stuck, that's going to be a harder one.  Myofascial Pain Dysfunction   [0:26:30]  So, now let's talk about myofascial pain dysfunction. And I will talk specifically about what  that is, what that means. And then to a degree, we're going to talk also about myalgia or  just muscle pain, not interchangeably with myofascial pain dysfunction. And this is an im -  portant distinction for you to understand. So, myofascial pain dysfunction is not specific to  TMJ problems. There's myofascial pain dysfunction all over the body. It consists of variable  muscle pain, meaning that it's not even always the same muscle, but it can be in the same  muscle groups, usually innervated by the same nerves. Restricted range of motion is a  hallmark.  [0:27:16]  And then the biggest one is trigger points with characteristic referral patterns. That last  one, trigger points, not trigger zones, but trigger points with characteristic referral patterns,  that is going to be the key factor with is this myofascial pain dysfunction. Or maybe said  another way, myofascial pain dysfunction separates itself by having referred pain, whereas  localized myalgia would hurt, as the name implies, in the local muscle, right? So, if my  masseter hurts, and it's in my masseter, and it's only in my masseter, and it doesn't go up  the side of my head, it doesn't go down to my neck, it doesn't go into a tooth, that's more  myalgia, more muscle pain. Whereas if we palpate on the muscle of the masseter, if we  palpate on the masseter and ask the patient, does that seem to go anywhere? Does that  make anything else feel different? They're like, "Man, I swear I feel that in my upper tooth."  Then that would be myofascial pain dysfunction.  Trigger Points   [0:28:23]  What are trigger points? So, to read here, this is from Travell and Simon's Myofascial Pain  and Dysfunction book. I strongly recommend that book. It's very old at this point, doesn't  mean that it's not relevant.   It's been around for decades and decades, very valuable, and  you'll learn a ton about muscles in that book, by the way. So, definition, a hyper-irritable  spot in skeletal muscle that is associated with a hypersensitive palpable nodule in a taut  band. So these are the knots that you feel when or that a massage therapist feels. You  know, if you go in and get a massage and they're like, "Oh, you got this knot there. That's  09/01/25   Page   of 10   17

SSC 2.0 - 108: What's That Clicking? Part 2  what they're talking about. The spot is painful on compression, so it hurts to push on it and  can give rise to characteristic referred pain, referred tenderness, motor dysfunction, and  even autonomic phenomenon. So, a trigger point in general, like if we had one here in the  sternocleidomastoid, goes up into the brain and note that the kind of the signal there is a  little bit longer there. So, the brain is picking this up as pain in the molar. Now, if we anes -  thetize the molar, the person will still actually have pain because it's not coming from their  tooth. So, the big key with myofascial pain dysfunction, frankly, is for you real dentists in  our group, because you will, once you know about this, you will, you'll start seeing this in  your practice.  [0:29:49]  You already have seen many, many patients who present with tooth pain. They say, "I've  got a toothache." They point to a specific tooth even, and you do your entire workup and  there doesn't seem to be anything wrong at all. That is oftentimes, not always, there can  be other things. There could be cracked tooth. There can be things like that that are a little  bit harder to figure out. But there, well, actually, not necessarily harder to figure out. I'll talk  about that in just a second. But it's not always muscle, but this is something that you  should definitely be looking at. So, let's look here at typical trigger points in the masseter.  The black X's are where the trigger point is. The red dots are where it hurts. So, all these  different areas of the masseter with our different red dots, here down at the angle, over the  eye, into the jaw there, here in kind of the deep masseter and right into the ear. So this can  be confusing for you and the patient because where it hurts isn't necessarily where it's  coming from. That's really the hallmark here.  [0:30:53]  But you palpate. When you're palpating these muscles, and I'll get into this more in level  three, but as you're going through with muscle palpation, it can't just be a push real fast,  like there, there, there, there. You have to kind of get going slower and push a little harder.  Now, if you're just doing a valuation for someone that you're going to treat for sleep apnea  with an oral appliance, you can be pretty quick. You can ask, do you have any facial pain?  Do you have any pain in your jaw muscles or anything like that? And if they're like, no, I  really don't, then you could be pretty quick in your evaluation. What I'm saying is if you  have a patient that you're trying to figure out if they have myofascial trigger points, you're  going to need to slow down a little bit. And once you find a spot, they're like kind of like,  "Ow, yeah, that kind of hurts if you're right there." Okay. And then you say, "Well, if I hold  that there, does it hurt just where my finger is? Or does it seem to kind of hurt or do any -  thing weird anywhere else?  [0:31:49]  Okay. Remember, let's don't lead the witness. So, ask questions that don't say, yeah, like  that hurts there and goes into your tooth too, doesn't it? So, we don't say that. So we're  just looking for, is there any referral pattern. Here's some in the temporalis muscle. And  temporalis, as you'll see here, is mostly the upper teeth. There isn't any trigger points that  go to the lower teeth. Whereas if I back up to the mandible, the mandible is upper or lower  teeth, depending on where it is on the masseter. So, you got to kind of look for both there.  09/01/25   Page   of 11   17

SSC 2.0 - 108: What's That Clicking? Part 2  Temporalis will tend to be more upper teeth than lower teeth. And then also notice all the  red dots around the actual trigger point itself. So people with temporalis pain, it tends to  hurt in the temporalis, but then it can also refer into the tooth. This is a kind of a cool pic -  ture from Travell and Simon's book showing, again, figure 5.2, just reading here, overlap -  ping pain referral patterns from myofascial trigger points in various masticatory and cervi -  cal muscles produce typical unilateral or bilateral migraine or tension type headache.  Okay. So, we talked about this when we talked about the, you know, Advil Migraine and et  cetera, migraine and all this kind of stuff.  q   [0:33:05]  So, people can have a presentation of migraine that are definitely tension type headaches  due to trigger points. And one of the main reasons I show this picture is this could be you  or your staff member, your hygienist, your dental assistant. Dental professionals are very  prone to getting these sorts of trigger points because of your head posture throughout the  day. Even if you're trying to do everything absolutely the best, you're going to have a  wacky head posture. Again, even if you're the world's best at posture, it's going to probably  affect you. And I've treated hygienists over the years in my practice that were really getting  close to just going on disability or just quitting basically because of trigger points that they  had in their trapezius muscle that were giving them headaches every day and that was re -  ally frustrating for them. Note this one too, so with the sternocleidomastoid, it is one of the  few muscles in the head and neck area that if there's pain, it will refer across the midline.  So see that arrow going across that guy's forehead there. That's usually weird. That's usu -  ally a check in the weird column when people say anything goes across the midline be -  cause right side is right trigeminal nerve, left side is left trigeminal nerve.  [0:34:21]  And usually they play nice with us and keep it simple, except in this case. So, sternoclei -  domastoid, that can be one if a patient ever says, "Yeah, I kind of have this pain, kind of  goes across my forehead." That should make you remember, "Oh wait a second, I wonder  if that's sternocleidomastoid." Note also in the digastric muscle here that the pain can be  felt in the lower front teeth. I had a sister-in-law who had this once and she described it as  her lower front teeth feeling itchy, which that's weird, right? So, our teeth are either nothing  or pain. Those are pretty much the only feelings that our teeth have, that they're kind of set  up to have is nothing, everything's fine, or hurt. Okay, when you do a cold test on some -  body, they feel the cold, but they feel the cold because it's very uncomfortable and that's  kind of the way it's set up to be. And she said, "Yeah, my teeth feel itchy." And she had  some physical therapy on those muscles. I diagnosed it as a possible trigger point, sent  her to a physical therapist. They kind of rubbed out those muscles and then she was fine.  Myofascial Trigger Points (Treatment)   [0:35:26]  09/01/25   Page   of 12   17

SSC 2.0 - 108: What's That Clicking? Part 2  Treatment of myofascial trigger points is often through massage therapy, physical therapy,  things like that. But then also trigger point injections. This is something that we teach in  Spencer Study Club. A few others teach this anymore. Well, I shouldn't say anymore.  There's rarely been people teaching this in the first place. You could probably take a  course through the American Academy of Craniofacial Pain or the American Academy of  Orofacial Pain perhaps. But again, this isn't something you're gonna have at your local  dental society meeting or state dental association meeting. That's not really gonna hap -  pen. When they're doing Botox nowadays for these problems, they usually aren't talking  about trigger points. They're just putting Botox into the muscle that hurts kind of generically  and then knowing that that Botox is gonna paralyze the muscle. The goal with the trigger  point injection is to disrupt the trigger point. So you see in these pictures here, ABC, that  the person is palpating the nodule, the top band. They're finding that little knot and then  kind of stabilizing it between their fingers and then taking the needle through their fingers  into that top band to hit it.  [0:36:37]  This is also done with acupuncture needles and physical therapists have trademarked this,  so to speak, as dry needling. Why that happened, if you'd like a little history lesson here, is  using acupuncture needles in many states is controlled by a board of acupuncture. In most  states, dentists can use acupuncture needles as part of their dental practice and you don't  need to ask anybody anything. In some states, California for example, to use acupuncture  needles, you basically need to be an acupuncturist and that's like four years of traditional  Chinese medicine school and stuff like that. I can tell you a whole story about me becom -  ing licensed in acupuncture in Idaho and the 300-hour course that I took called acu -  puncture for physicians. I won't right now, you can just ask me about that some other time,  but I eventually learned that I never needed to take that course. It was cool, I'm glad I took  that course, I learned a lot. Didn't use a lot of what I learned, which is a bummer. You know  me, I'm all about implementation, not just learning stuff for the fun of it. But I learned a lot  in the course.  [0:37:47]  And then I was able to teach Cameron and Kevin how to use the acupuncture needles,  and they haven't taken that training. But bottom line, physical therapists wanted to be able  to use this technique, and rather than getting in trouble, they kind of coined the new term,  so dry needling. So they're not injecting anything, because that would be Board of Medi -  cine, Board of Dentistry, stuff like that, and they're not doing acupuncture, so it's so-called  dry needling. So, tons of physical therapists do dry needling, and this is what they're doing.  They're trying to hit that trigger point, and if you do it right, you will get a local twitch re -  sponse, and this is what this looks like. Twitch, so you see that muscle tweaking like that?  That's called a local twitch response, and that is your goal. This is being done with an acu -  puncture needle there, obviously, but if you're doing this with a hypodermic needle, it's the  same thing. You're looking for a little twitch of that muscle. If you get the twitch, that's what  you're going for, and with an acupuncture needle, you would then basically be done in that  area. With a hypodermic  09/01/25   Page   of 13   17

SSC 2.0 - 108: What's That Clicking? Part 2  [0:38:46]  Needle, then we typically will inject a drop or two, literally, that's all you need to do, of Car -  bocaine into that muscle. That will make it numb. That makes it less sensitive. Most people  aren't going to have a problem with trigger points anyway. When I've done trigger points, I  just did one recently at a course. A dentist was there that had a bit of a headache and  asked me if I could do a trigger point on his trap, and I did, and his headache got better.  So typically, you don't have a lot of local tenderness anyway, but that's why we inject a lit -  tle local anesthetic. It has nothing to do with a local anesthetic, so that's sometimes a con -  fusing point for people. It's not about what you inject, it's about the technique. So if I was to  use my dental syringe and just get that local twitch response and pull out, be done, that  would have the same effect as if I drop a little anesthetic in there. Conversely, if I'm doing  the trigger point injection and I don't get a local twitch response and I inject anesthetic, it's  not going to make any difference.  [0:39:49]  It will feel better though, temporarily. So that's what basically we call a diagnostic injection.  If you numb up the area of the trigger point, then yeah, the patient will usually say, yeah, I  feel better, and yeah, that pain up the side of my head is better right now, or wherever it is.  The pain in my tooth seems to be better now after you gave me that shot here. So that's  valuable, but if you don't get that local twitch response, don't expect that trigger point to go  away.  Story Time   [0:40:15]  All right, story time. I had a patient quite some time ago, and she comes in and had been  referred to me, I believe by her dentist, if I remember correctly. And she, you know, I do the  whole point with one finger to where it hurts the most, and she points to her second pre -  molar area in the air where the tooth used to be. So she points to a space. No tooth, but  she says it hurts right there where that tooth used to be. Okay, that's weird, right? Now,  immediately I'm thinking trigger point just because of that, and then she tells me her story  that she started having this pain.  [0:40:58]  I can't remember if she'd been like under some emotional stress or what it was, but she  starts having this pain in her tooth, and she goes into her dentist and says, "Hey, this tooth  is killing me." Dentist does their workup. They don't necessarily see anything wrong, but  they believe the patient. She's a very, you know, level-headed woman. Husband is a car -  diac surgeon, which will be important to the story here in a second. And he does a root  canal on her, and she seems to feel better a day or two, and then the pain comes back.  And she's like, you know what? I think I may have steered you wrong here. Maybe it's the  tooth in front of it. So, then he gets her in, and he does the first premolar. And then a cou -  ple days go by, and she's like, "No, yeah, it's the first one that we were working on that's  09/01/25   Page   of 14   17

SSC 2.0 - 108: What's That Clicking? Part 2  still hurting." So at this point, the dentist is like, all right, time for me to punt, and refers the  patient to an endodontist. The endodontist looks at everything. Everything seems fine, ac -  tually, but just to be kind of safe, does an apicoectomy on the second premolar. Same type  of thing again.  [0:42:06]  Patient thinks maybe it's a little bit better for a day or two, and then the pain's back. Even -  tually, it's decided to just extract the tooth because it's just not getting better. So they ex -  tract the tooth. A couple days later, pain's back. Okay? By the way, why was it better for a  day or two? Placebo effect, basically. If you go in and you have a procedure done, espe -  cially a big procedure like that, a surgery, your brain is all on board like, yeah, man, that  was the right thing to do. This is going to be better. So, and it was also, it was never like,  oh, it's gone. I'm healed. It was, I think it's a little bit better. Okay, that's like wishful think -  ing, right? So now, tooth's gone, still hurts. Now what? Now we have the cardiac surgeon  kind of come into the picture here. So as a surgeon, like us, we're surgeons too, but he  wanted objective data here on what's going on. So he's assuming his wife has a tumor. So  she goes for a CAT scan and an MRI and everything's fine. So now what do you do? Okay,  so now we've ruled out any tumor.  [0:43:13]  We've ruled out anything like that. So now it's either she's crazy. So, send her to the psy -  chiatrist or she's got some weird TMJ problem. Send her to the weird TMJ guy. That's me.  So they opt for her to come to the weird TMJ guy. So she comes in, and this is, I think I  mentioned this earlier, that sometimes when you're in this field, we look like geniuses be -  cause all the bad stuff has already been ruled out and they've been funneled into our of -  fice. I knew she didn't have a brain tumor. I knew she didn't have some abscess. I knew  she didn't have a tooth problem. She didn't have a tooth anymore. I knew all of this had  been thoroughly investigated, and now she's in my office, right? So immediately, I mean,  literally, my staff gives me the, "Hey, here's what she says is going on." I know it's a trigger  point. So then I do, as part of that examination, you remember the cold spray stuff, well,  first I palpate, and I find a spot on her temporalis, because it was an upper tooth right here.  So I'm investigating the temporalis, I find it, I find a spot.  [0:44:18]  She's like, "Oh yeah, ow, that hurts." I'm like, "Okay, if I palpate, if I hold that there, do you  feel it anywhere else?" And she's like, "Yeah, in that area, in that area where that tooth  used to be. That makes it a little bit worse." I'm like, okay. So then I get the cold spray.  Cold spray, stretch out the muscle, cold spray, stretch out the muscle a few times, cold  spray, stretch out the muscle, pause a little bit, and then I say, "Does that make that area  where the tooth used to be worse, better, or no change?" And she's like, "It's gone. Yeah,  that pain's gone." So then, her and her husband are there, and I go get my book and show  her and him the pictures that you just saw of the temporalis trigger points. And I say,  "Okay, here's what I think's going on. It's been going on a long time, so I'm not going to do  a trigger point injection, I'm going to send you to my friend Jack, who's the physical thera -  09/01/25   Page   of 15   17

SSC 2.0 - 108: What's That Clicking? Part 2  pist, and he's going to work this out, and I'm pretty confident this is going to work." So they  leave.  [0:45:21]  So I hear later, so when she goes to the physical therapist, the husband went with her too.  And he was nice to me, but at the physical therapist, he basically tells the physical thera -  pist, "Hey, I know there's people in town and stuff that think highly of this Spencer guy, but  I think he's full of baloney. There's no way that this is some muscle problem. My wife for  sure has a tumor, we just haven't seen it yet, so you've got three visits to get her better,  and then we're done. We're done playing around with this stuff. There's no way this is  some muscle problem." Okay, well, lucky for me, she was better in two visits. Didn't even  take him three. Then ran into her a month or two later, and she says to me, "Hey, you  know, just thank you, Dr. Spencer. Why did it take me two and a half years for this to get  figured out?" And again, it wasn't because I was smarter than all those other doctors she'd  seen. She'd seen a bunch. It was because she'd been funneled in, and I knew to look for  something that the others didn't.  [0:46:25]  That's kind of the fascinating thing about being on the medicine side of things, is the diag -  nosis is usually the hard part. The treatment's easy. Once you can figure out the real prob -  lem, the treatment is usually easy, like direct, we know directly what to do or exactly what  to do, and effective. That's pretty cool.  TMD Recap   [0:46:25]  All right, so here's kind of our recap of the multiple hours here that we've spent talking  about anatomy and examination and then these most common TMJ problems you're going  to see. Retrodiscitis, I'd like you to remember tongue depressor test, Aqualizer, and Advil.  For trismus, I'd like you to remember severely reduced range of motion, usually one finger,  after an inferior alveolar nerve block. It's always going to be after an inferior alveolar nerve  block. When you have that Medrol Dosepak and physical therapy ASAP. Non-reducing  disc displacement, I'd like you to remember 26 millimeters range of motion, no clicking,  used to click, and they recently woke up stuck. Unlocking procedure or refer them to  someone who can do an unlocking procedure ASAP. And then lastly, myofascial trigger  points, remember these tender points in the muscle.  [0:47:41]  Get those pictures or take those pictures off these   slides, do a screen capture, have those  available, get the book, and just be aware, especially as a general dentist, as you're going  through your examination, that this could be what it is. I mentioned cracked tooth earlier.  You've got your tooth sleuth or things like that, that you can have a bite on the different  cusp tips. That's great for cracked tooth. And by the way, if it's a trigger point, the tooth will  not respond to anything because that has nothing to do with the tooth. So the tooth is just  09/01/25   Page   of 16   17

SSC 2.0 - 108: What's That Clicking? Part 2  going to respond naturally. So, on the biting of a stick or all that stuff, that's not going to  make it... Well, biting can be confusing because if you're having them bite on something,  it's activating their muscle, and that's where it's coming from, or the temporalis muscle,  then yeah, then that can cause it to be a little bit worse. So, be a little bit careful with that.  But usually for tooth pain, as you know, I don't know why I'm saying this to you, you know  this already, it's usually straightforward. When all of a sudden it's not straightforward, that's  when you start thinking myofascial trigger points. Treatment for that, trigger point injec -  tions, dry needling, or get them to physical therapy as quick as possible.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 17   17

