SSC 2.0 - 213: Reasons Oral Appliance Therapy Fails  SSC 2.0   Level 2  213: Reasons Oral Appliance Therapy Fails  [intro music]  All Custom Appliances are Bespoke   [0:00:12]  Now, please remember all custom appliances are bespoke, meaning custom made. If you  think about it, and again, I've talked about this before, but I'm going to repeat some of  these really, really important principles. No, even an appliance that is like, if I have multiple  appliances for myself, if I had the same 3D printed EMA, let's say, it will not be, those two  appliances, I will be able to feel a little different. Just because the day that one was made,  it was slightly more humid in the environment that it was made, or that batch of acrylic was  just a couple parts per billion different than the other batch of acrylic. The power to the  laser that day was a little bit different. Who knows? There's going to be something that's  going to be a little bit different, and our mouths are so sensitive, we can tell any little differ -  ence.  [0:01:14]  Now, if you've had multiple appliances made for you, and as I've encouraged you to do in  the past, please have multiple appliances made for you, ideally on the same scans. And  this is what I've done now for years and years and years. My current scans are from like  2019, and I always have new appliances made on those. Although pretty quick, I'm going  to get... I have lower teeth that are a little crooked, a little hard to floss in there. So I'm go -  ing to get those straightened out, and then I'll have to start over again. But my point is that  all these appliances fit similar, but they're all unique. There's never been another appliance  just like mine made. And this is the same for your patients. So don't think and don't even  teach them stuff like, "Oh, this is a tap appliance, this is a ProSomnus appliance, this is a  Herbst appliance, this is an EMA appliance." You can talk about the name of it, but don't  make it about the plastic.  [0:02:18]  We're going to use this appliance. Here's something I like about this appliance, or when I  wore this appliance, this is what I liked about it. Now, I think this is going to be best for you  because of how big your tongue is, how short your teeth are. They're not getting a lot of  stuff to grab onto there. This can be done while you're showing a scan of their mouth and  go through this decision process that you made to help determine what are you, patient,  most likely to use. You might even use that phrase that I use all the time of the best oral  appliance is the one that you're going to use. Why not? Why not say that to the patient?  The best oral appliance is the one you're going to use, and we're going to choose. There's  multiple different but I'm going to choose the one that I think are most likely to like to be  09/01/25   Page   of 1   12

SSC 2.0 - 213: Reasons Oral Appliance Therapy Fails  comfortable for you, for you to wear every night for years. That's what we're going for. And  doing that, helping them understand that this is not the same as what they're going to see  on Facebook. This is not the same as what they're going to see at Walgreens perhaps, if  they're in that section of the pharmacy there and happen to see the SnoreRx on the shelf  there. Those things are stock. They're one size fits all. And bring that up. Because one size  fits all means fits basically nobody ever well. When you've got a million different kinds of  mouths.  [0:04:02]  Like I have a mouth where I had premolars extracted for orthodontics. I don't have my wis -  dom teeth. So my mouth, if you have your premolars is very different than your mouth. And  really lean in to the custom nature of this and what is going into it. Again, having those 3D  scans is so important nowadays. And to put it on a big old screen and to show them what  you're doing and to... That's one of the things is really cool about 3D printing is it's helping  patients understand this process and how cool it is. This is the new techniques that are be -  ing used to make them an appliance. It's more comfortable. That's the whole point. If it  wasn't going to be any better, then why go to all this hassle of doing 3D printing and all  these other things?  But Please Don’t Make It All About The Plastic!   [0:04:54]  And let me reinforce, if you make it about the plastic and not about the patient's outcome,  them getting back in the same bed as their spouse, them not falling asleep at the wheel,  them not losing their job. If you don't make it about the outcomes and you make it about  the plastic, then it's about the plastic. And why wouldn't that patient get something they see  online that's a fraction of the cost? Why wouldn't they get the thing at Walgreens? Why  wouldn't they, let's say you've got a practice like mine or you're trying to build a practice  like mine that's referral-based. And every time Jamison Spencer's going out there teaching  more people, you've got more competition. Now, I don't think that's true. I think there's  more than enough people for all of us to treat. But even having said that, if somebody  comes to my practice and then I teach their dentist how to do oral appliance therapy, and  their dentist says, "Oh, well, you don't need to go back to Dr. Spencer. I can do that for  you. I took a course from Dr. Spencer." If I made it all about the plastic, then why wouldn't  they do that? If it's just about the plastic, if they're just ordering the same appliance that I  did from the same place. Don't make it about the plastic, make it about your skill and ex -  pertise and getting them their outcome.  Reasons Oral Appliance Therapy “Fails”   [0:06:19]  09/01/25   Page   of 2   12

SSC 2.0 - 213: Reasons Oral Appliance Therapy Fails  Now let's talk a little bit about reasons that oral appliance therapy fails. Note that fails is in  quotes here. So I can probably count on a couple hands the number of patients in my ca -  reer, and this would include Dr. Kearney and Dr. Mangelson working with me, of patients  who we've not helped at all. Those are so rare. Yeah. We don't always get the AHI below  five. We don't always get it below 10. We don't always get it by 50%. But I'll cover some of  why that is and how you really need to look at the details and determine what really hap -  pened in that study. But nevertheless, it's relatively rare for us to get an AHI of zero. It  does happen. It's roughly 10% to 20% of the time that it will go to zero. But again, that  means 80% of the time it's not. So CPAP, on the other hand, blows the airway open basi -  cally to zero always. And that's what a lot of our sleep doctors are used to seeing is an AHI  of zero. So don't be surprised if sometimes it didn't work. It's compared to what? If you  compare oral appliance therapy to CPAP and your key factor is AHI, yeah, it's not going to  look as good.  [0:07:38]  On the other hand, if you're looking at reduction of snoring, ability to sleep, ability to use it,  actually using it, things like that, ability to stay awake, stuff like that, then we're right there.  So on this fails thing, we got to look at this. But similar to making it about the plastic, den -  tists tend to make it about the plastic. We're surgeons, it's a tool, so it's a thing we're using.  And if the patient isn't getting super better, then we're going to blame the tool. And you'll  see this on the Facebook group all the time of people, just recently, someone was like,  "Oh, I fit myself with this appliance and I had this issue. And what do you think?" The actu -  al story was that you could go back and look on the Facebook group of this, but they had  an EMA and the pads were pretty high. And if you don't know this, when you do your  George Gauge for an EMA, most labs are going to just not really use the George Gauge  for your vertical at all. They're just going to use that for AP, and then they're going to put  those pads on. Or if it's 3D printed, same thing, they're going to have a standardized thing.  [0:08:50]  And so that vertical can be high. Now, the advantage of having the little pads in the back is  that's all you got to adjust. You have little small areas to adjust instead of full flat pieces  against each other. So it's a lot easier. Nevertheless, in her case, these pads were so high  that it got rid of all of her freeway space. So she was resting on the pads and that resulted  in some muscle contraction. This person is almost assuredly a 1% occluder. And now all of  a sudden it was like she was sleeping with a bite block in her mouth and she was resting  on that, which caused some contraction. She said that this gave her some discomfort. So  of course, I asked questions because you'll know this if you get on the Facebook group,  that I don't tend to just give you answers. I tend to help you learn how to think, how to  problem solve yourself. This is about teaching you to fish, not giving you a fish. Whereas a  lot of Spencer Study Club members, sometimes thinking that they're really smart, they'll  just give an answer. And that's not uncommon for people to do.  [0:09:57]  09/01/25   Page   of 3   12

SSC 2.0 - 213: Reasons Oral Appliance Therapy Fails  You'll see that all the time on other forums of just like people asking a question and instead  of people actually trying to get to the bottom of it, they'll just be like, "Yeah, do this." Okay,  we're doers. As surgeons, we like to do stuff. So anyway, so she puts this down and  there's one guy and he puts down, well, there's more comfortable appliances. Like, "Hey,  stupid, your problem is you chose a bad appliance in this guy's opinion." And then some -  one says, "Like what?" And he gives a brand of an appliance, a specific model of a specific  brand, which is a fine appliance. I don't like that company because they set up clinics to  compete against dentists several years ago. And I have a long memory for stuff like that.  So I don't use that company ever. But again, he made it about the plastic because he's  like, "Oh, well, duh, you're using that appliance. Why don't you use this $700 appliance in -  stead? And then I'm sure you'd be fine." Okay. I was about to say no offense to that guy,  but this is offensive. That's stupid.  Don’t Always Throw the Appliance Under the Bus   [0:11:06]  It wasn't about the piece of plastic. And if that is how you would run a business of like, "Oh,  well, let's just abort that appliance because you didn't like something about it. Let's don't  even try to do anything. Let's just go to another $700 appliance." And frankly, that's proba -  bly how that guy does run his practice. So just don't be dumb. Think these things through.  Try to learn from each of your patients. Each of your patients, the treatment is bespoke.  Each of your patients, it is unique. And they're going to have a unique experience. They're  going to respond uniquely. Now, granted, there's only so many responses that people can  have, but you will learn as time goes. But dentists will, in general, always want to throw the  appliance under the bus. It's possible that this person's jaw discomfort had nothing to do  with the appliance. Now, it's probable that it does because she said, if I go without the ap -  pliance, I feel okay. So again, we can... And she's a dentist herself. So she's going through  this herself to try to figure this out and learn, which is I strongly recommend all of you do  this. And that's awesome. But she was making it about the appliance, and in this case,  probably correctly so. But don't always throw the appliance under the bus.  Change in the Patient’s Condition/Weight   [0:12:31]  So here are some reasons that oral appliance therapy, so to speak, would fail, maybe not  actually the oral appliance therapy failing. Change in the patient's condition/weight. So if  somebody gains a bunch of weight, and by the way, while they were gaining that weight,  what were they also doing? Getting older. So as we get older and floppier, as I like to say,  and heavier, that's not a good recipe for the exact same treatment still working. People  that are on medications, they have to have their medications titrated, if they change weight  and things like that, oral appliance therapy, why would that not be the same thing that we  09/01/25   Page   of 4   12

SSC 2.0 - 213: Reasons Oral Appliance Therapy Fails  might need to change that titration of the appliance? So be watching for that one. And you  can tell people that. Hey, if over time you gain weight or something like that, and you start  snoring again, then we need to talk about that because the same amount of the same jaw  position that is working for you currently may not work for you 10 pounds heavier. So that's  one.  Positional   [0:13:33]  Position. Now we're going to talk about this as we go over the sleep studies on the how to  read a sleep study module there. This is perhaps the biggest one that I see on reviewing  sleep studies of oral appliance therapy supposedly failing. And again, as a beginner in this  or even somewhat seasoned, if you don't go into the details of the sleep study, you can  miss this stuff. If you are doing the old, let me just look straight at the conclusion and all  right, well, the AHI was 18 before and now it's 14. Now it's 20. That could happen. It's  again, relatively rare, but you could have the AHI go up. And that would appear that you  made them worse, not only not better, but worse. In my experience, almost 100% of the  time, it's not 100% of the time, but dang near. It approaches 100% of the time. It's posi -  tional. And I'll talk about this as we go over the sleep study stuff, but very quick, and then  I'll repeat myself then. We had a patient that his AHI went down, but not very much, but he  felt better.  [0:14:56]  The snoring was gone. His wife was thrilled. This guy couldn't have been happier, but the  AHI only went down from 24 to 20 and not that exciting. Well, as we dug into the sleep  study, what we found is on the baseline study, and these were all PSGs, he was on his  side the whole night. Well, actually I take that back. He rolled onto his back for like five  minutes and the rest of the time he's on his side. And during that five minutes that he was  on his back, his AHI was like 88. Now he's only on his back for five minutes, but in other  words, he had a whole ton of apneas in that five minutes. And every time he would go onto  his back, his airway would obstruct and he would be on his back for just a bit. And then his  brain would be like, "This stinks." And would roll him back onto his side. Well, guess how  he slept with oral appliance in? On his back. He likes sleeping on his back. In sleep labs,  they tell you to sleep on your back. And this was in a sleep lab that he was back with oral  appliance.  [0:16:00]  So the first study, they told him to sleep on his back too, but he couldn't because his air -  way would just obstruct every couple minutes, almost every few seconds. You barely  breathe. It's mostly obstructed. With an AHI of 88, that's a lot of obstructions. But once he  had the oral appliance and they said, "Sleep on your back." Now he could. And this hap -  pens all the time with a PSG. With HST, they might give those instructions, but not usually.  They're gonna just do what they do. But watch for that. It's super common for people to be  09/01/25   Page   of 5   12

SSC 2.0 - 213: Reasons Oral Appliance Therapy Fails  on their side in a baseline study and on their back on the follow-up study because they can  sleep on their back now. And then that makes it so it looks like the AHI is not as good. So  watch for the positional therapy. And by the way, that's also a way to really pick a patient  that is gonna be successful is if you see on the baseline that it's strongly positional, it's like  AHI is 50 on their back, but it's only like six on their side, you're about to hit a home run  because you will stabilize their airway and you're gonna talk to them from day one about  getting on their side.  [0:17:16]  And as long as they don't have some shoulder issue or something like that that limits them  from being on their side, you wanna get them on their side. That's gonna be just as impor -  tant as oral appliance. And every once in a while, you'll even have a patient that if they  could just get off their back, they wouldn't even have sleep apnea. Again, those are awe -  some patients to have because you could still do the oral appliance, but you would really  not need to protrude them at all. You would just keep them from falling backwards, and  then you would say, "Hey, this is all about you staying on your side."  Lots of Things That Can Make You Tired   [0:17:41]  Now, here's something I pulled from the internet, from Mayo Clinic, and it's causes of fa -  tigue. Okay, causes of fatigue. So most of the time, fatigue can be traced to one or more  lifestyle issues, such as poor sleep habits or lack of exercise. Okay. Fatigue can be  caused by a medicine or linked to depression. Got it. Sometimes fatigue is a symptom of  an illness that needs treatment. Okay, all that's cool. So here's a list of some things that  can cause fatigue. All right. So first we have lifestyle factors. Fatigue may be related to all  those things there. Conditions, exhaustion that doesn't let up might be a sign of, and then  as you see here, all the blue are links to more information about those problems. But I'm  not going to read all these. I'm just going to let you soak in how many things might cause  somebody to be tired. Was that a lot? Do you think that's actually the exhaustive list? I  doubt it. And a lot of these things, there's one thing that if you open that up, then it would  be a bunch of other things within there. Okay, so to say that certain medications may  cause fatigue. Well, okay. Hundreds of medications, if not thousands of medications could  cause that.  [0:19:05]  My point is, if you were doing the model that is often popular in dentistry and often sold to  dentists like you of, I'm going to screen. I'm going to work with this company from five  states away. And they're going to see my patient via telemedicine or whatever. And the pa -  tient's going to get an HST and it's going to be read by that dude five states away. And  then they're going to say, "Yeah. You got sleep apnea and go back to your dentist for an  oral appliance." What was not done? I've talked about this in other sessions. They did not  do any labs. They would do a workup to a degree. But frankly, since you've already done  09/01/25   Page   of 6   12

SSC 2.0 - 213: Reasons Oral Appliance Therapy Fails  some screening and told them that this person is snoring and you can't see down their  throat and their bed partner said that they are stopping breathing. Yeah, it's not that a  home sleep test isn't indicated. Don't get me wrong. It's just, are there some other things  possibly going on that could make that person tired? You bet there are. So we don't ignore  the sleep apnea. And obviously this is not intended to paralyze you because like, "Oh my  gosh, I can't do anything until I've ruled out these 48 problems that, Jamison just showed  on the screen." No. The idea though is this is why I want you to ideally live in la vida local,  which means you're going to do stuff locally.  [0:20:35]  Just today, I was talking to a dentist that I'm currently coaching. And he has a primary care  doctor next door. And so we had a conference call and I was talking to this primary care  doctor. I'm like, "Hey, here's what we'd like to do." This doctor has been sending people for  home sleep tests and stuff. And he was using a service and whatnot, like I just described.  And I'm like, "We'd really like this patient to get higher quality care, frankly, just like we  would want one of our own family members. And that means send them to you. And then  you decide what labs need to be done. If any, you decide to get the home sleep test if you  think that's appropriate. The home sleep test gets done. You get paid for all that stuff. It's  all covered by the inpatient's insurance. And then the report comes back and then you de -  cide what the next step is too. If you want to try CPAP first, great. If oral appliance you  think is a good choice for this patient, then great too."  [0:21:32]  The doctor was really excited about that, said that that sounded great. And this care that  this dentist is about to provide for his patients just got elevated dramatically. Okay, there's  things going to get caught, and again I talked to the dentist about this today. His case ac -  ceptance is going to go up because right now it's all driven by him. And then you got this  HST people online. And again, I don't mean to offend them or say they're doing a bad job.  I'm sure they're doing a good job. But what they aren't doing is selling, if you will, the den -  tist. They might say, "Hey, looks like you could be a candidate for an oral appliance be -  cause you have mild to moderate sleep apnea or whatever." They say that. But the prima -  ry care doctor is right from the get-go is going to be like, "Oh yeah, my next door neighbor  dentist there, man, he's awesome. He's just such a great dentist and takes such great care  of his patients. And I hear he sent you over here because he thinks you might have sleep  delay reading disorders. He's not sure. So he sent you over here and he's going to go  through."  [0:22:49]  And he'd like, "Oh my gosh, you know what? I think he's right. I think that's your problem.  Now let's get some labs. Let's rule out some of these other things here that could be vita -  min D, could be iron, could be some stuff like that. Let's rule that out or get that checked  out. But your dentist is right. We should do this. Let's get this study, see what happens  there." So there, the doctor is reinforcing that you made a good call, that you did the right  thing. And then when the study comes back that shows that the person has a problem,  then the doctor's gonna be like, "Hey, you know what? Yeah, sure enough, your dentist  09/01/25   Page   of 7   12

SSC 2.0 - 213: Reasons Oral Appliance Therapy Fails  was right. Caught it, right on. Here's your options, and you got the mask that blows air in  your face. A lot of my patients don't like that. Some of them do great, but a lot don't. If I  were you, I'd probably try an oral appliance, and that's what the dentist is doing. So you  want to just go back there? Or would you like to try the mask first?" And a lot of patients  are going to be like, "Well, yeah, so you think the dentist is the way to go? Yeah, that's  what I would do." "Okay, cool."  [0:23:51]  Now when that patient comes back, they're ready to rock. So it's not doing it all by your -  self. There's no what's called pre-framing. There's no someone else making a case for why  this should be done. My practices are referral-based. So our case acceptance is super  high. When people come to us, they've already made a decision, for the most part, to go  into treatment, because they were referred by someone, and then it took effort for them to  make an appointment and come to the appointment and do all that stuff. And if they had no  interest, they wouldn't even come. Now, sometimes people aren't as serious as others,  and they may make it about their insurance and stuff like that. But it's where it's our job to  help them see the value and see that this is about the outcome that they're trying to get  and not about the plastic.  [0:24:52]  Okay, so there's another reason that oral appliance therapy could fail, and this is a big  one. So when you have a patient and they are snoring less and feeling better, and you get  them back to the sleep doctor, so one thing you'll also see on the Facebook group all the  time is if somebody's like, "Hey, my patient, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah." Either they're hav -  ing pain or they're still tired or whatever, I will ask, unless someone else does, "Do you  know the oral appliance is working?" Okay, and if you say, "Well, no, I don't yet." Well, then  start there. Okay, let's make sure that this thing's actually protecting the airway. So if you  have that follow-up objective study, that's like, "Yeah, it's good." Even if you told me, "Well,  Jamison, it sure appears to be working because the snore lab went from like epic to like  gone. So this person's not snoring at all anymore. And they say that they're a little bit less  sleepy at work, but they're still struggling. They get in traffic, bumper to bumper traffic, and  they're still nodding off the wheel. So pretty serious.  [0:25:57]  Okay, then I'm going to say, "Well, sounds like the oral appliance is doing its job, which is  protect the airway. Punt to the medical doctor, let them do all these labs before you start  worrying and frankly wasting time by trying all sorts of other stuff with the appliance." Okay,  we will tend, again, to throw the appliance under the bus. Well, maybe it's this, maybe it's  that, maybe we need to do this, maybe we do that. No, if it's protecting the airway, it's done  its job. Now we get our medical colleagues on there to rule out this other stuff, and they'll  get paid for it, and it's covered by their insurance. So bottom line, don't always throw the  appliance under the bus.  09/01/25   Page   of 8   12

SSC 2.0 - 213: Reasons Oral Appliance Therapy Fails  Change in AHI   [0:26:38]  Now let's talk a little bit more about this change in AHI stuff, and this is relatively recent.  This was for sure not on Spencer Study Club 1.0 and took me some time to think this  through and then also found some literature on this that is relatively recent too. And here's  the idea. The idea is so we know that an apnea is defined as obstruction of the airway for  10 seconds or greater. So that means that someone holding their breath for nine seconds,  that's not an apnea, and again, that seems ridiculous. So hold your breath for nine sec -  onds while trying to breathe, nine seconds, and tell me that that couldn't disrupt your  sleep.  [0:27:34]  This is why a lot of our thinner, fitter women get missed in all this stuff is because the rules  are set in such a way to find fat old men and not thinner women. So that's a problem. Now,  the problem gets exacerbated because a 11-second apnea, or we'll just use 10, so saying  that a 10-second is an apnea. Okay, well, what about a 20-second apnea? Is that worse?  Well, yeah, but it's still counted as one apnea. So if you had a patient and they're going  through and they're scoring, and one time the patient stops breathing for 10 seconds and  then starts breathing normally again, the airflow is obstructed, well, that'd be one. And then  like another one happens, and this one's 20 seconds. Well, that'd be one more. And then  another one happens, this one's 30 seconds. Well, that'd be one more. And then another  one happens, and it's a minute and 20 seconds. Well, that'd be one more. You get my  point? So sometimes the length of these apneas makes a big deal because someone  stopping breathing four times that are 15 seconds each will score four apneas, whereas  someone stopping breathing one time for 60 seconds will score one apnea, even though  we would all think, man, stopping breathing for a whole minute, that seems maybe worse.  Apnea Duration Graph   [0:29:01]  So this is looking at this... I like this, in search of paradoxical results. So looking at this  graph a little bit, you see again the red is the severes, the blue is the moderate, the green  is the mild, and the length of the apneas is what this is showing. So people with severe  sleep apnea also have longer apneas. And if you look at that big peak before it peters off,  the big peak for the milds is roughly, oh, looks like maybe 12 seconds. And then the mod -  erates is like maybe, oh, not that much more, 14 seconds-ish, 15 seconds. And then  severes, we get up 20, maybe 25, maybe 30 seconds. And then we still have plenty of  people that are still up there at about 40 seconds, whereas the milds, we have basically  nobody that's at the 40 seconds. On the moderates, we have very few that are at the 40  seconds. So you see what I'm going for here is the milds, they have less and shorter. The  moderates have more and longer. The severes have more and longer.  [0:30:11]  09/01/25   Page   of 9   12

SSC 2.0 - 213: Reasons Oral Appliance Therapy Fails  And this all makes sense. And this, again, is another reason that our younger, fitter people  get missed in all this stuff is your body gets used to this negative stimulation. Your body  realizes, "Well, Jim here is stopping breathing a lot, but we haven't died yet. So I think it's  okay. I think we'll be all right. So we don't need to disturb him from his sleep just yet."  Whereas people with more early on the disease, as soon as they have any apnea at all,  the brain's like, "Okay, this is no good at all. I really like the whole breathing all the time  thing. This obstructing thing... I'm going to wake the person up." This is another reason  why mild patients can feel so bad. Now note here that was supine and then the non-  supine, same thing. Note how on the non-supine for the severe, way longer than the milds  and the moderates. Look at the males versus females. Not a huge difference there. But  again, if we just compare our milds, particularly there on this graph, the mild women,  they're shorter. Those are shorter apneas.  [0:31:32]  So here, by the time we get to the 20 seconds, we're almost out there. Whereas over here,  we have still plenty at the 20 seconds. So up here, it says the median is 17 seconds. Here,  the median is 15.2 seconds, which doesn't sound that big of a difference. But again, look -  ing at the overall graph, we just have that little bump at about 10, 12, and then it goes out.  And for the men, we have the bump a little bit moved over and then higher. There's more  area under the curve for the men. So women in general, shorter apneas, less severe. And  note that in the women, it is also the milds are more mild, the moderates are more moder -  ate, and the severes are less severe. Think this through because again, when we talk  about going over the sleep studies, this is going to be a thing. And this is a thing that's  missed all the time. And this is a thing that you've never been taught before probably, is  that just because that AHI changes, you need to get to the details. How long were the ap -  neas? Are we talking about shorter apneas now that may have counted more? Because  that will show up as a higher AHI than they had before.  Duration of Respiratory Events   [0:32:55]  So to read this slide, the available evidence supports the fact that longer respiratory  events have more detrimental effects on health compared to shorter events. As hemody -  namic changes and cardiovascular stress mainly due to the hypoxic burden related to  these respiratory events associated with OSA are higher in relation to longer respiratory  events. Holding your breath longer is bad. So if you help somebody have shorter apneas,  that's good. But watch for it because it may not show up as that good with the AHI. If I  made the point. Okay, I hopefully have beat that point in the ground. This is, again, if  you've been a member of Spencer Study Club for a long time, you may have heard me  teach this before on a Zoom meeting or something like that, but it wasn't in the videos be -  cause we didn't know this when we did Spencer Study Club 1.0. Going on with the author's  results here, nevertheless, recent well-qualified studies also provide strong evidence that  09/01/25   Page   of 10   12

SSC 2.0 - 213: Reasons Oral Appliance Therapy Fails  OSA patients with short respiratory events can have a or have a significant elevated risk of  all-cause mortality, possibly because of more unstable ventilation and increased autonom -  ic nervous system activity.  [0:34:04]  Therefore, it seems that two distinct OSA phenotypes related to the duration of respiratory  events exist and both have several adverse health effects. Okay, another way to look at  that is those with the shorter respiratory events, their body is reacting to this, and that's  what it's talking about, the autonomic nervous system activity. This is that fight or flight.  They're getting into fight or flight faster. That could disturb their sleep even worse, and  then make them more fatigued, and all-cause mortality includes car accidents. It includes  falling asleep at the wheel and dying. So don't just think heart attack and stroke, but that  can be contributed too, because we all know that cortisol and stress hormone contributes  to all those sorts of problems, and arteriosclerosis, and all sorts of stuff. There's a while,  and there are still some schools of thought that are like, "Yeah, mild sleep apnea, who  cares?" I think we're learning more and more and more that we all should care about the  mild sleep apnea. And frankly, hopefully, if my prayers are answered by the time you're  even watching this video, maybe we won't even talk about those terms anymore. If I  haven't...  [0:35:16]  I'm sure I said this on one of the other modules, but Christian Guilleminault, one of the  founding fathers of obstructive sleep apnea, the guy who coined the term AHI, before he  died, said that the biggest disappointment of his career was creating AHI, because he  never intended that to be the number. It was just a number. It was a metric to look at, and it  became everything. It became what everyone looked at, including, of course, insurance  companies. So the idea that, well, mild or so-called subclinical, you don't have sleep ap -  nea because you have an AHI of four, never would Christian Guilleminault have said that  was appropriate. These arbitrary cutoffs. And that goes for us too. Now however, as this is  being recorded in 2025, yeah, if they have five to 15, then you have to show that they got  something else wrong. If they have over 15, then that's moderate to severe, and insurance  is going to cover it. But remember, that is based on evidence from 20, 30 years ago, not  current evidence, and they are always very slow to change guidelines. And still, the vast  majority of people that are diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea in 2025 are fat old  men. That is still the biggest market for sleep apnea. In our practices, it won't be that way,  but we're a small amount compared to all the others that are out there doing this.  Sleep - Related Breathing Disorders   [0:37:03]  I like this graphic as well to remind you that our sleep doctor friends are more than just  sleep apnea people. So on this sleep-related breathing disorders, this is the stuff that  we're involved in. So we've got snoring here, obstructive sleep apnea, central sleep apnea  09/01/25   Page   of 11   12

SSC 2.0 - 213: Reasons Oral Appliance Therapy Fails  we don't really deal with, sleep apnea in kiddos. So this is all our sleep-related breathing  disorders, but there's other sleep disorders that our patients can have concomitant with  sleep-related breathing disorders. So if you have obstructive sleep apnea, it doesn't mean  that you don't also have a circadian rhythm or sleep-wake disorder. It doesn't mean that  you also don't have some sort of dyssomnia.  [0:37:43]  It doesn't mean that you also don't have some sort of parasomnia. Hopefully not exploding  head syndrome right here. That's a real bummer one. So my point of this and going  through and familiarizing yourself, what our sleep doctors actually are knowledgeable  about. And I wish that our sleep doctor colleagues would embrace working with more of us  dentists, because we're going to actually send them a lot of the the easier ones, a lot of  these more mild to moderate sleep apnea patients that are going to be reactive.  [0:38:15]  They're going to do very well with oral appliance therapy. They're going to get feeling bet -  ter quickly, but we're going to have mixed in there too, normal free range humans, as a  friend of mine says, a sleep researcher says, Orfeu Buxton, if you've ever heard him use  that term, free range humans. I love that. We have free range humans in our dental prac -  tices, and we're going to also pick up people that are just tired. They have insomnia. They  don't have sleep apnea. They have insomnia. And we need to remember, hey, they're  sleep doctors. They know this stuff. I am the farthest thing from a sleep physician, a sleep  expert. I know a lot about obstructive sleep apnea and a lot about oral appliance therapy  protecting the airway that I know a lot about. I actually know more about sleep in general  than most medical doctors do, but that ain't saying much because I've heard from medical  doctors that they only get like an hour in medical school, and I've had a few more than  that. Okay, you too. So you know a lot about this, but our sleep doctor friends, they know a  lot more about all the other sleep disorders.  [0:39:25]  So if the patient's not getting better and their airway's protected, then get them back to the  sleep doctor and say, "Hey, patient's not doing better. Oral appliance is working. Oral ap -  pliance is doing its job." And if you talk to your sleep doctor colleagues too, does this mean  that sometimes people on CPAP don't feel better? Well, yeah. So CPAP will blow the air -  way open, but that doesn't mean that it gets rid of some of these other problems that the  patient has, which is one of the reasons a lot of people give up on CPAP.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 12   12

