SSC 2.0 - 311: TMJ Injections Part 1  SSC 2.0   Level 3  311: TMJ Injections Part 1  [intro music]  Temporomandibular Joint Injection Technique   [0:00:12]  Hello, and welcome to another edition of Injections Outside the Deep Dark Hole and One  Inside. In this section, we've already talked about myofascial trigger points on the other  one. We talked about enthesis on the other one. And now we're finally going to talk about  injections into the temporomandibular joint, this one being outside the deep dark hole. You  could actually access the jaw joint from inside the mouth, but that would be a lot harder.  So we're going to do it the easy way and teach you how to do that from outside the deep  dark hole. Okay, so going back through some anatomy, I know you've been through this a  hundred times, but always good for us to go back and refresh our memory. So our jaw  joint, we are looking to get into the capsule here. And so the capsule has a upper and low -  er part. It has a superior joint space and an inferior joint space. And sometimes like you  could read something or talk to somebody and they could be like, well, are you in the infe -  rior joint space or the superior joint space? And for the most part, your answer is going to  be, who cares? And that is the right answer is I'm in the joint space and that's good  enough.  [0:01:32]  Now, I'll make a case for that in PRF that we'll talk a lot about here, that oftentimes when  you have a bunch of arthritis of the bone, what can you fairly confidently predict is going  on with or happen to the disc? Think about that for a second. So if you have what appears  to be from the radiographs, a nearly or even potentially completely bone on bone situation,  what can you say with pretty good confidence, even without an MRI, is going on in that  joint? Did you say the disc is probably gone? The disc is beat up. It's perforated at least.  Very oftentimes it's the tissues not even there anymore. So in that case, when there isn't a  intact disc, there is no superior and inferior joint space anymore. There's just the joint  space. So the lateral capsule and the medial capsule is all still there, but that separating  tissue of the retrodiscal tissue and the disc that used to separate that capsule into superior  joint space and inferior joint space ain't there anymore.So there's just a joint space.  [0:02:53]  Now for an unlocking procedure, getting that fluid in there also because it's a closed cap -  sule still has that hydraulic effect. Would it ideally be in the inferior joint space most of the  time for an unlocking procedure? Yeah, it would. And I'm going to talk to you about how  you can increase your accuracy with getting into the inferior joint space. But for starters, I  just want you in the joint space. I want you in the capsule at all. And we're going to talk  09/01/25   Page   of 1   14

SSC 2.0 - 311: TMJ Injections Part 1  about how you know you're in the capsule and how you know you're not in the capsule as  we go through this. And just today, just a little while ago, I had a Spencer Study Club  member reach out and she was asking me questions about an unlocking procedure and  put in there, well, I did this and the person opened wider and so therefore I think, and I  was like, yeah, go back and watch those videos because you didn't say the things that I  teach on the videos of how you would know if you were actually in the joint space or not.  So let's go through all that stuff so that you know.  Why are TMJ Injections Needed?   [0:04:06]  All right, so why would a injection into the temporomandibular joint be needed in the first  place? Well, a couple different reasons, diagnostic, we're going to talk about, pain relief  and therapeutic. So pain relief, meaning just like right now, I want to get you out of pain so  that we know that we can help you. Okay, I've talked about this in other sessions. This is  showing people you can help them by actually helping them. And so you might do a anes -  thetic injection to relieve their pain. This is also a great thing to do on an initial evaluation,  initial examination to make sure you understand where their pain's coming from. And by  the way, it makes it so the person can actually concentrate and think and answer your  questions and be able to appropriately consent and appropriately say, yeah, let's move  forward with treatment. Put yourself in a situation of being at a six, seven, eight on a 0 to  10 pain scale. If someone was asking you questions, would you be in the best position or  condition to answer those questions? Probably not. So sometimes giving someone an  anesthetic injection for pain relief, for temporary pain relief right then is really, really helpful  for the bigger scheme of things.  Therapeutic   [0:05:24]  On the therapeutic, we have anesthetic injections, which can also be therapeutic just in  helping them have their pain relieved for a little while. PRF is going to be our biggest one  nowadays. Prolotherapy, probably less used, unless wherever you live, you can't do PRF  for some reason. Steroids, question mark. There are still indications, I guess, for a steroid,  but I think you've heard me say this before that if, with all these injections outside the deep  dark hole, if Jenny has a trigger point, I would use PRF way before I would use steroid.  And if she had a temporal tendonitis, I would use PRF way before I would use steroid.  Okay, so I'm probably out of the steroid business at this point. Maybe you could give me a  case of why you think that that's something that you need to do. In the jaw joint, I think we  should be out of the steroid in the jaw joints business. Okay, the risk is not worth the po -  tential reward. So I would maybe not even just a question mark here, but just like a cross  that out.  09/01/25   Page   of 2   14

SSC 2.0 - 311: TMJ Injections Part 1  Reducing a Non-Reducing Disc Displacement   [0:06:43]  Reducing a non-reducing disc displacement. So this is the unlocking procedure that we  teach and the reason for the joint injection is a couple fold. One, and the big one, is to get  a hydraulic force in there. The capsule is enclosed. When you've put that full 1.7 cc's, 1.6  cc's, the full carpule into the capsule, it has nowhere to go. And when that person moves  their jaw around or you move their jaw around, that fluid is going to swish around in there  and make it more likely for that disc to pop back into place. So the hydraulic force, big part  of it. And then the other one is pain relief. People, when you're doing an unlocking proce -  dure, they're going to be a little freaked out. And even though they've been off the disc for  a long time, they're still going to be concerned. And stretching them to help get them to  pop onto the disc is uncomfortable as well. So that anesthetic effect makes the unlocking  procedure much, much easier.  To Perform Arthrocentesis   [0:07:44]  To perform arthrocentesis. So this would be mostly medical doctors are going to do this,  oral surgeons, and that's going to be an injection in the jaw joint and then another injection  into the front of the jaw joint. And then they're going to flush out the joint with fluid. That's  called arthrocentesis. You probably will never do that. You might help an oral surgeon do  that for certain cases. Again, with PRF, I should check with my partners, but I can guaran -  tee you that we are almost never referring for arthrocentesis nowadays. We used to a little  in the past, but like by a little, I mean a couple of year out of hundreds and hundreds of pa -  tients we would see each year, we'd have a couple that we would think arthrocentesis  might be indicated. And sometimes those were even for people that needed an unlocking  procedure or something like that, and they were scared. They were scared of the shot, not  as much scared of a needle in their arm to sedate them. So we would send them to oral  surgeon, they would sedate them, and they would basically do the unlocking procedure via  arthrocentesis. Okay, so those are all the different reasons that we might have to inject the  jaw joint.  Diagnostics   [0:09:03]  All right, now let's kind of cover those individually. Diagnostic, determine if the jaw joint is  the primary pain generator or not. The TMJ has been described as the great imposter, and  people can have pain in the joint, and it's not coming from the joint. Maybe it's from the  masseter or the temporalis, maybe it's a trigger point, maybe it's from the temporal tendon.  So remember, all of those things can refer into the ear slash jaw joint. And if that's the  09/01/25   Page   of 3   14

SSC 2.0 - 311: TMJ Injections Part 1  case, if you anesthetize the jaw joint, and it's actually coming from their masseter muscle,  then it would still hurt. On the other hand, if their overall facial pain is coming from the jaw  joint, you anesthetize the jaw joint, and all their pain will go away. So we're really trying to  figure out what is the primary driver of their pain, and diagnostic injections of the jaw joint,  very important, important skill for you to have.  To Determine if Surgery of the TMJ is Indicated   [0:09:57]  Lastly, is to determine if surgery of the TMJ is indicated. I wish more people did this. It  seems obvious to me that you would always do this, but when I talk to people that have  been told that they need joint surgery and stuff, it's not common that I hear that this was  done. So here's the key. If someone is considering open joint surgery, you should be able  to make their pain go away with anesthetic. If you inject the jaw joint, and it's like, all right,  so pre-injection, zero is no pain, 10 is being burned alive, what's your pain level? Oh man,  it's an eight, it's awful. Okay, inject, come back. All right, worse, better, no change.  [0:10:40]  “Better, for sure”. Okay, cool, how much better? “It's probably a four now”. So still hurts,  pretty bad, huh? “Yeah, still hurts pretty bad”. Point with one finger to where it hurts now.  “Yeah, kind of here”. They might start pointing other places. It's possible that the jaw joint  is part of the equation, but not the whole part of the equation. And that means if we cut out  their joint and put in a metal one, they could still have pain because it wasn't all from the  jaw joint in the first place. On the other hand, if you can anesthetize the joint and that  makes their pain completely go away, then that could be an indication for surgery. Al -  though I would say almost never anymore and the patients that I did this on, and we did  refer for surgery because the anesthetic would always give them pain relief, 100% pain  relief, ended up being worse after surgery. So nowadays I would not do this. As you know,  I am not pro-surgery.  [0:11:41]  I really believe that with us having regenerative techniques nowadays, that surgery is go -  ing to be a thing of the past in just a few years. Oral surgeons are good people. They're  good doctors. They don't want to do harm. They don't want to make anybody worse. The  only reason they do surgeries in the first place is to help people. And when we show that  we can get 99.99999% of people better with PRF without invasive surgeries, they're going  to stop doing surgeries. So for you, your loved ones, your patients, even with this, if you  can make the pain go away with anesthetic, I would be absolutely doing PRF as much as I  could. And I would be concerned actually if they never got better. I would be looking at a  different diagnosis because in our experience now, and we probably have roughly a thou -  sand people under our belt as I record this video. That's just our offices. If you include  everyone else in Spencer Study Club that's been doing this the past three, four years, it's  09/01/25   Page   of 4   14

SSC 2.0 - 311: TMJ Injections Part 1  probably approaching 3000, 4000, 5000, I would imagine. And so far, the feedback that  we're all getting is that patients feel better, like almost every time.  [0:13:01]  Even when we don't see changes in arthritic conditions, the patient's still having pain relief.  And of course, that's all they care about. Nobody gets joint surgery because they think  they need a new joint. That applies to any joint. You could have a worn down knee or hip,  and if it's not bothering you, you're for sure not going to go get surgery. So that's kind of  my take on surgery. But again, if you're someplace where you kind of have limited abilities,  but PRF should never be that problem. It is so inexpensive. It is so readily accessible. This  really should be what people are getting and not surgery.  Pain Relief ‘Reboot the Computer”   [0:13:43]  Pain relief. This is the first principle here I call “rebooting the computer”. Obviously, you  understand the analogy there. If there's something going on with your computer or your  phone or something like that, sometimes it's just like, you know what? Turn it off. Restart it.  And then the problem's solved. Back in the olde days when people would call tech support  for their computer or stuff like that, that was always the first thing they said.  [0:14:08]  If your printer wasn't working or whatever, they'd be like, “turn off your printer, unplug your  printer, plug it back in, turn it on. Does it work now?” And you'd be kind of like, well, I al -  ready did that stuff. So this is that same principle. We're just turning off the nervous system  for a bit, getting rid of the ability for the nerve to send those signals, and then hoping that  when it comes back online, there's nothing to send. There's no information to send, so it  doesn't. And you will be surprised at how often this works. I can't tell you exactly why it  works, other than it's just there's a hypersensitivity and oversensitivity to the nerves in that  area, and they just continue sending this information. And you turn it off, and it comes back  online.  [0:14:59]  The trauma, the issue, the tissue damage is not there, and therefore then they don't have  pain. So that is a pain relief/diagnostic injection, because what you're doing in that case,  you're like, man, some of this doesn't make any sense. Let's go ahead and see if we can  turn your pain off. So that's diagnostic. Make sure the site and source of the pain is the  same. And then also, it's like, hey, and by the way, maybe when this comes back online,  you just don't have pain anymore. And I would say that, by the way. So if you inject some -  body for pain relief and it makes the pain go away, then you say, hey, let's hope and pray  here that we just rebooted your computer, and when it comes back online, we're not going  to have any problems. That would be awesome. And just kind of plant that seed. Again, get  their brain on your side.  09/01/25   Page   of 5   14

SSC 2.0 - 311: TMJ Injections Part 1  Short-Term Relief   [0:15:50]  Next, give the patient some short-term relief. Now, this is a bit of a bummer when you're  doing it for this reason if they are chronic patients. But on the other hand, if they're just get -  ting into treatment, then giving them some pain relief, as I mentioned before, at the exam  level so that they can kind of communicate with you and they can understand what you're  talking about and they can properly consent and they can make decisions, that's really  valuable. So to make that pain go away temporarily. But I've also had patients where they  have more chronic problems, and they'll come into our office every once in a while, kind of  when they just get to the end of their rope and they just need a little break. And we'll give  them a long-acting anesthetic to just give them a little break.  Therapeutic (Anesthetic)   [0:16:39]  All right, on our therapeutic injections, for anesthetic injections, you're typically using long-  acting anesthetics to give long-acting pain relief. That makes sense. However, not your  first time. So your first time you're going to inject someone's jaw joint, you definitely want to  use a short-acting anesthetic. I'm going to go why, but in a nutshell, it's because you might  catch their facial nerve, and then they can't blink, and not being able to blink for 30 min -  utes with Carbocaine versus six hours with Marcaine is kind of a big deal. So you kind of  want to get comfortable with that person's anatomy, that you can give them shots with  short-acting anesthetics, and they don't have a problem before you use a long-acting  anesthetic. With the anesthetic, you might consider adding something else, such as  steroid, and that'd be dexamethasone 4%, and literally a few drops. So I've never been a  big fan of steroids ever in my career, but when we would use steroids, and started, now  this is in SSC 1.0, I talk about using literally a few drops. Not like just a   little, and a little is a  quarter of a cc. No, I literally mean a couple drops, and that's it. And why that is, is be -  cause I think steroids break down the tissues, they don't build it up.  NO Steroid.. PRF Instead   [0:18:02]  Now again, as of now, no more steroids as far as I'm concerned. So no steroids, you  would do PRF instead. Now you may ask, well, can I do PRF and anesthetic? Uh-huh, you  can. There is some data that the PRF may not work as well, but still going to be way better  than anesthetic and steroid. So if you need to get the patient numb in order to figure some -  thing out, where's the pain coming from, stuff like that, or for an unlocking procedure, for  example, then just maybe give them some time, let some of that anesthetic disperse, be -  cause the thing that would hurt the PRF would be the pH change there, and you'd be kind  of breaking down some of the good stuff that you're about to put in their jaw joint. So if you  09/01/25   Page   of 6   14

SSC 2.0 - 311: TMJ Injections Part 1  can give them some time, that would be great. What we typically do with PRF related to an  unlocking procedure is we do the unlocking procedure with anesthetic, get them unlocked,  make the temporary splint do all that stuff, and then we get them back a few days or a  week later, and that's when we do the   PRF. So there's a little bit of a distance there.  Reducing Disc Displacement   [0:19:10]  For a reducing disc displacement, we're typically going to use a short-acting anesthetic  and watch the whole lecture on unlocking the non-reducing disc to go over that step by  step. So as I mentioned, when we're going into the joint capsule here, we have our  retrodiscal tissues, we have the tissues in front of the disc, and those are connected into  the joint capsule. When we have an intact disc and retrodiscal tissue, we'll have a superior  joint space and an inferior joint space. Do you see that the capsule as well as the tem -  poromandibular ligament are out here on the edge? Now the capsule is typically where  we're going to inject or what we're going to inject through the temporomandibular ligament.  You're only going to do that if you're going to do an anterior approach, which I rarely teach.  There could be an indication for that in certain circumstances, but as I'm going to show  you now, we're typically going to do a posterior approach, just easier for you to get into the  joint, to know you're in the joint, and that's how we're going to do it, whereas an anterior  approach is just a little bit more sophisticated.  [0:20:22]  However, I'll also talk about using ultrasound, and with ultrasound, you could do either, and  you might get better at one version or another. The capsule, and we see the condyle going  through here, so here we have kind of a more seated position, and then as the person  comes forward, they're moving down the articular eminence, and that is opening this  space back here, and we have again the articular disc, we have this upper and lower joint  space. The goal of our injection is to get into the capsule. So I show here that we've had  the person open, and that opens that space, and then that's where we're going to stick our  needle. So if you put your finger in front of your ear opening and open, you'll fall into a  hole. That's where we inject, okay? So I like to say it's not brain surgery if you do it right.  Okay, do you get that joke? So yeah, don't stick it straight up into their brain, be smart how  you hold your needle here, how you put that in, beware of the needle like we always are,  and then again, I'll talk about ultrasound-guided too, but we're just going to, if you just  open, and that's kind of the orientation, is how I'm putting my finger against my jaw joint  there, I feel the condyle, if you feel the condyle, kind of move away from your finger, that's  where you're going for.  [0:21:40]  So you don't have to hit the back of the condyle, but it doesn't hurt if you do. So that is our  goal, we would have our superior joint space, our inferior joint space. This is going to be  easier said than done, to make sure that you're in the inferior joint space. You would think  09/01/25   Page   of 7   14

SSC 2.0 - 311: TMJ Injections Part 1  that, well, if I go in and I hit the condyle, I have to be in the inferior joint space, right? Well,  you would think so. Does that make sense to you, by the way? Kind of think that through.  So if I inject and my needle goes in and hits the condyle, wouldn't it by definition have to  be in the inferior joint space? Again, yes, because that's where the condyle is. The condyle  is in the inferior joint space. The superior joint space is just that area, that potential space  above the disc, between the disc and retrodiscal tissues and the fossa and the articular  eminence. That's the superior joint space. The inferior joint space is below the disc and the  retrodiscal tissue, and it's where the condyle is. So again, theoretically, hit the condyle, got  to be there, right? I'm just telling you that it may not be there. Sure seems like it would be,  but as I'll show you in a minute, even though we think it's there, sometimes it's not there.  Remember we've got our lateral pterygoid attached to there too. You're not going to be  anywhere close to the lateral pterygoid unless you did an intraoral approach or you did an  anterior approach and then you could hit the lateral pterygoid if you wanted to on purpose  for some reason. The easiest way to hit the lateral pterygoid if you want to on purpose is a  gow gates. So just the same technique you would use for a gow gates mandibular block,  that gets you, so your goal there is the neck of the condyle, well the lateral pterygoid at -  taches to the neck of the condyle, so that's another way that you could do that.  TMJ Innervation   [0:23:26]  The innervation of the temporal mandibular joint is all mandibular division of the trigeminal  nerve. There are three different nerves however, but this is all mandibular division of the  trigeminal nerve. So same nerve that goes to your lower jaw is the nerves that are going  into your jaw joint. Auriculotemporal nerve is the vast majority, so about 75% of the inner -  vation of the jaw joint is auriculotemporal nerve. Then we have our deep temporal and our  masseteric. So just remember though, all mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve.  Avoid this!   [0:23:57]  Alright, now we want to avoid this gland here. So the parotid gland is right there superfi -  cial, and I love this netter drawing here because you see that like there's our ear hole, so  where I just had you put your finger in front of the ear opening and open, you would be  right on your parotid gland perhaps. Now there's going to be some person-to-person vari -  ability here, but bottom line is that the parotid gland lives right in this area. If you inject su -  perficial, you're going to hit the parotid gland, and if you hit the parotid gland, the facial  nerve goes through the parotid gland. Also, the parotid gland is a salivary gland, and it's  more of a watery saliva in the parotid gland. So the way I kind of picture it is if you inject  into the parotid gland, it'd be like dropping food dye, food coloring into a glass of water,  and you would just go all over the place. That's going to happen here too. So here we  09/01/25   Page   of 8   14

SSC 2.0 - 311: TMJ Injections Part 1  have the example of can you tell which side is anesthetized? It might be the opposite of  what you think. So the side here that he can't move anything, there's your ultimate Botox  there. He has no wrinkles on his forehead or anything like that or around his eyes because  all of those muscles are turned off. He cannot use them because his facial nerve has been  injected.  [0:25:22]  That's not my patient or someone that I work with, but I did when I taught anatomy at  Boise State, I had a TA, and this TA later worked with me in our clinic, became my lab guy,  and I got the idea once. I was like, you know what would be fun is to show my students  what a Bell's palsy facial paralysis looks like. And I was like, hey, Nick, would you mind if I  injected your facial nerve? And he's like, “nah, that'd be fun”. So I did. And I did that a cou -  ple years. So I taught that all year. So it was like two semesters. And I did that, I think,  probably for two years. And then I decided, no, that's a bad idea. I shouldn't just anes -  thetize this dude's facial nerve just for the fun of it because who knows if something bad  would happen. Never did. But I would do that and just kind of show the students and he  was a good sport about it. And I would use Carbocaine so it wouldn't last him all night. It  would be gone pretty quick.  [0:26:30]  But watch for this because this is one of our indicators of, hey, I was in the wrong spot. Or I  put a bunch of anesthetic. So dentists have to a degree been trained that to give a pain -  less injection, you start pushing anesthetic the second you're near the tissue, right? And  the idea there is that you're going to put this anesthetic in front of the needle and the per -  son's not going to feel it at all. And good idea. I like that idea. But here we don't want to do  that. So with a joint injection, you're going to go into the joint and be pretty confident you're  in the joint and then you inject. Don't just start willy nilly injecting before you believe you're  in the joint capsule. If you do, you'll catch the facial nerve. One of the great things about a  temporomandibular joint injection is we can tell where we were based on our understand -  ing of analogy. So if we're superficial, you'll get facial nerve. They won't be able to blink on  one side. They won't be able to move their face on one side. It usually affects the eye  more than the other muscles because of just the branch that you're going to hit there. But  that means, oh, I was superficial. If you're in the right spot, then you're going to have their  bite be off if you put enough fluid in there. So if you put more than half a cc of fluid into the  jaw joint, and this is also with PRF, if you do a cc or more, then their bite should feel weird  because that joint space is a closed space.  [0:28:09]  So when they go to close, there's fluid there. They can't compress the fluid, so their bite  will feel off. Sometimes it'll be visibly off. Sometimes it'll just feel off. So that means you're  in the right spot. If you were too deep, then you're going to do a reverse gow gates, I call it,  which is a gow gates from the outside. So you're going to get their lip. You're going to do  an infravalveolar nerve block externally. Now, that might be a cool skill for you to have,  right? So if you have somebody that can't open their mouth for dental work or something  like that, or they're infected, and you're like, how the heck am I going to get this person  09/01/25   Page   of 9   14

SSC 2.0 - 311: TMJ Injections Part 1  numb? Well, that's how. So you would do like you're doing a jaw joint injection, except in -  stead of going into the capsule, your goal would be to go past behind the neck of the  condyle to get to where that inferior alveolar nerve is coming in to the mandible and you  would get a reverse gow-gates. So if you're too deep, then they're going to get their lip  numb and their tongue numb and all that stuff.  [0:29:13]  Okay, just like you did a mandibular block, not necessarily the tongue, depending on  where it is, but probably the tongue. Does that make sense? So kind of go through that  anatomy, because this is something that I find really kind of cool about this is when you do  the injection, you ask questions, you're going to know, was I in the right place or not? And  this is, again, this email that I got earlier today was like, well, I did this and, but they didn't  say, oh, and their bite felt off. All they said was, well, and they open bigger. Well, open big -  ger could just mean that they're numb. And that could be from having the anesthetic in the  capsule, or it could be from having the anesthetic affect the auricular temporal nerve,  which just covered a second ago is 75% of the innervation of the jaw joint. So they don't  hurt as much when they open, even though they're pushing things out of place.  TMJ Injection Inform Consent   [0:30:07]  Okay. All right. So this temporomandibular joint injection and manipulation inform consent  is in your document center. Feel free to modify this for anything you want or any way that  you want to.  [0:30:21]  Okay. Once again, some just kind of other diagrammatic and photos here of what you're  going to do, what your goal is. Okay. We see our facial nerve, we see our product gland.  So on this cadaver product gland still going quite the way up there. But you know, there's  the ear. So you'd be more kind of where it's marked there in between 33 and 34 would be  your area of injection for the jaw joint. Most likely that is above the parotid gland in this  person and unlikely that you would hit the parotid gland. However, if you were superficial,  what would you do? Well, you would catch one of the branches of the facial nerve, proba -  bly that number 31 right there, which probably goes right to a bicularis oculi. So then they  aren't going to be able to blink.  [0:31:07]  Okay. And don't get freaked out about things like that. Just learn from it. And that is the key  is like, oh, okay, yeah, we caught that nerve there. And I've had fun with it with patients  like, oh, yeah, take a selfie, send it to your friend. That's so cool. And you're going to come  back here in about 30 minutes, you'll be able to wink again. But go ahead and let's have  some fun with it while that's lasting there. Okay. Don't flip out and be like, oh my gosh, I  can't believe that happened. And they won't freak out.  09/01/25   Page   of 10   14

SSC 2.0 - 311: TMJ Injections Part 1  TMJ Injection Technique   [0:31:40]  Now let's talk about the injection technique. So palpate for that posterior depression as the  patient opens their mouth. So that's by far the easiest because you're going to feel the  condyle move away from your finger. Not in everyone. So if they are a little bigger and  have a lot of redundant tissue, nice way to put it in that area, then you might not feel it as  much. And you might have to push pretty hard to feel that condyle moving away. Most of  your patients, it's going to be pretty darn obvious what's going on there. Prepare the skin  with betadine or alcohol. You're just going to wash this off. This is another important point  here. So between me and my partners, we've done, there's no way we've done fewer than  10,000 joint injections over the years.  [0:32:27]  This is something that our practices do pretty much every single day and that I did thou -  sands of before my partners joined me. Knock on wood, we've never had a needle track  infection or a joint infection with this. And that's pretty awesome because this is, it's the  face. We're able to wash it off. It's one of the advantages of injections outside the deep  dark hole is if we were going in the mouth, there'd be no way to clean that surface, right?  And we would be, this is a hollow needle. We've got to push something through the nee -  dle. So you've got a hollow needle. So we're taking whatever's on the surface of that initial  injection, in this case, the skin out here, and sticking it into the jaw joint when we take that  core sample, so to speak, and then squirt it in there. So thank goodness that this is on the  outside, and we've done tons and tons and tons of these with just alcohol, just your typical  75%-80% isopropyl alcohol, and again, knock on wood, no problems. If you wanted to use  betadine, that's totally cool. Make sure they're not allergic to betadine. That'd be a bum -  mer.  [0:33:41]  But you just don't worry too much, but don't be dumb either. So make sure that you do  clean off the area in a smart way so that you have not necessarily sterile technique, but  clean technique. If you wanted to go full-on sterile technique, I'm totally fine with that. If  you want to drape them, if you want to get out the betadine and scrub it all up, and then  have the betadine now that's also not the brown color and stuff, that's less stainy and all  that kind of stuff. If you want to do that whole thing, I encourage you to do that. As a matter  of fact, the patient's going to feel better about it. They're going to be like, wow, this is a re -  ally serious procedure you're going through here. They got the blue drape on me, like I  was in the OR, and there's just that little circle there, and everything's cool. These guys are  doing a great job. I encourage it. So consider doing that in your practice. It's only going to  cost you a little bit more to go to that level, and you could use sterile gloves. You could do  the whole enchilada. It's going to cost you very, very little more, and then no way in heck  are you ever going to have a problem. We don't have a problem doing it with a clean tech -  nique, but there's certain advantages, I think, to taking it to that next level.  09/01/25   Page   of 11   14

SSC 2.0 - 311: TMJ Injections Part 1  Prepare the Skin with Ethyl Chloride   [0:34:50]  Next, prepare the skin with ethyl chloride or fluoromethane or a quick blast of endo ice,  and this is topical anesthetic. So that's why we're doing this is we've used fluoromethane,  the instant ice that you can get on Amazon, and just kind of spray that area. And it's not  the spray and stretch, where it's like slow, slow, slow, slow, slow, slow. It's not like that. It's  just the spray and then go. And so this is topical anesthetic, and you also don't wait like  you would with a intraoral topical anesthetic. It's spray. Don't overdo it because it can still  cause frostbite here. So I like to spray and then inject, and through the skin quick, and  then you can kind of move a little bit and feel for that condyle, feel where you're at with the  needle. Sometimes you'll hit, and that usually means that you've caught the temporal  bone. Like if you put the needle in, it's just like bonk, and it's barely in. That means you're  on the temporal bone, and then you redirect, go down, and then you can change your an -  gulation and go back in.  Have the Patient Open and Close   [0:36:00]  I'll usually have the patient open and close a few times and then stay open. So I'll be like  open, close, open, close. We'll get really clear on my hallmark there, open, and then typi -  cally like open, spray, inject. You could use a mouth prop. I don't. I've never had a patient  really need a mouth prop. It's concerning to the patient enough to just have their mouth  open, and you put a mouth prop in there, and it gives them then that kind of sense of I'm  not in any control here because I got this block in my mouth. So I'd avoid that if I were you.  Again, I'll talk about this towards the end, but using ultrasound guidance in this may be a  different technique. You may have the patient actually stay closed. If you can do it with  them closed, it's more comforting to the patient. That's a stronger position. If you had your  teeth together, you would feel more secure. The bummer is it gives us less of a space to  go into, but that's the idea behind the ultrasound guidance is that we're using the ultra -  sound to guide us into the small space, whereas with this technique of opening, we're  opening the space to make it easier for us to get our needle into it.  Step-by-Step   [0:37:18]  All right, so going through this step by step here, we palpate for the depression. The pa -  tient opens their mouth. Prepare the skin with alcohol, in this case, then the cold spray.  She says, burr, that's cold. Palpate, have an open mouth a few times, and then insert the  needle in an upward, inward, and anterior direction. Upward, inward, anterior, aiming for  09/01/25   Page   of 12   14

SSC 2.0 - 311: TMJ Injections Part 1  the superior posterior aspect of the condyle. Depending on the patient, we're going to in -  sert that needle about a half to one inch. Contact of the condyle is not necessary, but is  ideal to confirm location. By the way, since their jaw moves, when you do hit the condyle,  you can say, hey, go ahead and close for me a little bit. What should you feel if you're on  the condyle? You should feel it move. If they open and close, and you're sitting there, and  you think you're on the bone of the condyle, and you see them like, you don't feel nothing  at all, except you're going like, bonk, bonk, bonk, I'm on bone, but their moving is not  changing what I'm on.  [0:38:24]  Well, then you're not on the condyle, are you? Think through all of this stuff with the  anatomy. This is not rocket science, but you do want to think this through. If you are on the  condyle, then the second that they move a little bit, you're going to be like, okay, yeah.  They move their joint. I felt it on my needle. Boom, you are in the spot. You are in, by defin -  ition, the inferior joint space. This is where I'm talking about that sometimes you will hit the  condyle, but you actually didn't hit the condyle. You are still probably on the temporal bone  someplace, and then you're in the, hopefully, superior joint space, and sometimes you're  still too superficial. You just barely hit it as soon as you got through the skin. You hit the  temporal bone. You're in this far, and you won't always hit their facial nerve, but you're  probably going to hit their facial nerve in that circumstance.  Aspirate and Deposit   [0:39:16]  Aspirate and deposit the solution after the needle's in the appropriate location. Avoid in -  jecting while inserting the needle to minimize the chance of inadvertent anesthesia of the  facial nerve as talked about before. On the aspirate, it's just always a good idea to aspi -  rate. It's not necessarily our big concern here is like, oh my gosh, what if I inject into the  vessels? And by the way, that's never the concern. So do you know why we aspirate when  we give dental anesthesia? It's not because, again, the world would end if we put the  carpal tunnel anesthetic into their blood vessels. It's that they wouldn't get numb because  putting the anesthetic into the vein is going to make it go away out of the area.  [0:40:02]  So that's why we aspirate. It's not that we're worried about, oh my gosh, if we put this into  their veins, it's going to kill them. It's that we want the anesthetic in the area there. We  don't want it going out through the blood vessels. So same thing here. If you didn't aspirate  and you injected and you got into the retrodiscal tissues, which are full of blood vessels,  and you actually injected into a blood vessel, it wouldn't be awful, might make their heart  race or something like that if you're using something with epinephrine in it. But the bottom  line is it's not going to give them any anesthesia. It's not going to make them numb. So  that's the main idea here is when we aspirate, oh, positive aspiration. We're then moving  09/01/25   Page   of 13   14

SSC 2.0 - 311: TMJ Injections Part 1  the needle, going to another spot. Okay, cool. Not in a blood vessel. Great. Let's deposit  the anesthetic there so that it helps them get numb, which is obviously the goal.  Insert the Needle in..   [0:40:54]  Insert the needle in that upward, inward, and anterior direction, aiming for that superior  posterior aspect of the condyle. And again, contact's not necessary, but I would encourage  you to try to get contact with the condyle, having them do that little movement there so that  you know that you're actually in that right spot. Check out the pictures of me there in the lot  longer hair. Okay, aspirate and deposit the solution for the reasons that we just talked  about. Okay, so there is actual patient. We're using a medical syringe there, but it's the ex -  act same thing with a dental syringe. Nothing special about it. Then I just have the patient  hold with their finger there. And with the unlocking procedure, if you remember, these  same pictures from the unlocking procedure, with the unlocking procedure, one of the rea -  sons, so obviously I'm having the patient hold that alcohol wipe on there to stop any bleed -  ing, but also I'm going to have them immediately start moving it all around and if it pops,  think they'll know? Of course they'll know. So they will be right there on it, and they're go -  ing to be like, oh my gosh. Okay, so that's another reason to have them. So don't just have  them hold it there for a little bit, but the whole time that they're doing their manipulation,  have them keep their fingers there, and then that way they will know.  [0:42:11]  Okay, some other pictures using Jenny as the model here, wiping off the area with alcohol,  using the ethyl chloride or the fluoromethane, the instant ice, as a topical anesthetic. This  is not therapeutic or diagnostic like we're using it for in our initial evaluation or with trigger  points. This is to numb the skin, just like with a topical anesthetic intraorally. This is what  we're going to use extra orally. Orientation of the dental syringe, again, that kind of upward  and anterior positioning. And then that's about how far we go in. Ideally, we hit that  condyle, the patient can move a little bit, feel that on the condyle, and then we're just going  to put the alcohol there to stop any bleeding.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 14   14

