SSC 2.0 - 510: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 1  SSC 2.0   Level 5  510: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy  Cases Part 1  [intro music]  Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases   [0:00:12]  Hello, and welcome to Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases, How to Deal with Them  and How to Avoid Them. Let's jump in. Here's all the different cases that we're going to go  through. The patient whose AHI doesn't improve much, doesn't feel any better, can't toler -  ate the oral appliance, develops jaw pain, has a significant bite shift, dental trauma due to  bite shifts. So we're going to cover each of those categories here, and then a few other  things at the end.  AHI Doesn’t Improve Much   [0:00:41]  So let's jump into first AHI doesn't improve much. This is going to be the most common of  all the things I'm going to talk about in this session is AHI not improving as much as the  patient's subjective symptoms would make you think that it's going to, as well as the pa -  tient's objective symptoms of snoring. And if they are tracking that with SnoreLab, but in  very common circumstances, what we're looking at here is the patient is snoring less and it  can be significantly less, feeling better. And that's the criteria that I've taught you to use to  send the patient back for consideration of a follow-up sleep study. The patient gets that fol -  low-up sleep study, and then it's like, hey, you know, their AHI went from 25 to 20. And  that's moderate to moderate.  [0:01:36]  That's not that great, right? And you're perplexed because the patient is thinking that  everything's awesome. Sometimes it's more than just you're perplexed, you're upset be -  cause the sleep doctor sometimes too will put in their report, this happens to us and  everyone else in this field, appears oral appliance is not effectively treating the patient's  sleep apnea. Patients should consider going back on CPAP. And you feel like, wow, you  know, you feel personal that this is personal, that you failed. And so for the first part,  maybe to a degree, get over that a little bit. We're surgeons and our surgical training is that  if something doesn't go well, it's probably us, right? As a surgeon, if the crown fails, it's  maybe your crown prep wasn't that good. Or maybe you didn't notice that the lab did  something wrong, but still it's on you. And everything tends to fall to us as surgeons. If you  09/01/25   Page   of 1   17

SSC 2.0 - 510: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 1  are using materials that are not effective, you only use them one or two times. And then  you're like, yeah, I'm done doing that. I'm not going to do that. We were edge of the sword,  tip of the spear on printing.  [0:03:01]  We were starting to print probably now about seven years ago that we, as I record this in  2025, so back in like 2017, 18, we were starting to 3D print, actually before that. I think I  had my first printer around 2015, maybe even earlier. And we were really excited about  printing appliances and that this would make treatment more economical for our patients  and faster and everything else. And we had to redo about 150 appliances because they  lost retention over time. And kind of we took that on us, right? We didn't charge the patient  more. We didn't blame necessarily the manufacturer or the printer or any of that stuff. We  didn't ask the company that we'd paid all the money to for the resin to give us our money  back or any of that. We kind of took that on us, had new appliances made at our cost. And  we lost literally a couple hundred thousand dollars when you take into consideration all of  the expense with time and the lab bills and everything else that we had to do. So we are  now hesitant to move forward with that again because of that experience. That is typical of  a surgeon type of mindset. Whereas the contrast of this would be doctors that are on the  medical side of things, they are much more comfortable with failure, with things not work -  ing because a lot of what they do is, well, I got a theory of what's going on.  [0:04:37]  So let me try something and see what happens. And the thing I tried, if it works, then that  supports my theory of what's going on. And if it doesn't work, then that doesn't support my  theory of what's going on. And then maybe we'll do some testing. Maybe we'll get an MRI  at that point. Maybe we'll do this. Maybe we'll do that. Maybe we'll try another therapeutic  approach based on what I think is going on. But they're very used to this idea of I try  something, hey, that didn't work as well as I'd hoped with this patient, now let's try some -  thing else. We're not as used to that. So number one, become more comfortable with this  idea that not everything is going to be a home run. Not every AHI is going to go to zero. As  a matter of fact, in my experience, we only get the AHI to zero about 10 to 20% of the time.  So 80% of the time, they're still going to have some residual apneas and hypopneas. But  here's the key, is the devil is in the details and you will often find the answer to this riddle  by looking at the sleep study.   Now, there's a part in level two of understanding sleep stud -  ies. Go back into that, dive into that a little bit more. And I give a bunch of examples in  there. If you ever have a question on this, there's stuff that you can post to the Facebook  group and get other people's help with. But I'm going to go over some of the classic things  that we see on these.  Sleep Study Review Sheet   [0:06:10]  09/01/25   Page   of 2   17

SSC 2.0 - 510: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 1  So in your Spencer Study Club document center, you have this sheet that I developed for  a sleep study review. You're going to have all the numbers for your baseline study, and  then compare that to the oral appliance study. And for the first many of these that you do, I  would strongly encourage you to go and fill out every single line on this with the baseline  and with the oral appliance titration, even if it's successful. So if it goes from 30 down to  three, and you're like, oh, that's awesome, still do this exercise so you put in your reps on  what am I looking for? What changed? Clearly the AHI changed, but you're going to look  beyond AHI. And most of the answers are beyond the AHI or will help make sense of the  AHI.  Type of Study   [0:07:06]  So looking at this a little closer and going through each of these. So first, we're going to  look at the type of study, PSG, HST, split night, et cetera, whatever. Now, ideally, you're  going to be apples to apples. So something else that even on the type of study here might  even be the equipment used. So was the baseline study done with a watch pad and the  oral appliance titration study was done with an ARIES unit? Something different. Now,  they're both home sleep testing units, but they have different ways of getting to the result,  different measurements that they're using. That can make a big difference just because of  the different equipment. Now, you know that I'm a huge advocate for PSGs and oral appli -  ances, particularly being titrated live in the sleep lab. That's going to help a ton if you can  do that. This is all going to be assuming that you aren't doing that, frankly. If you are doing  that, then in my experience, the sleep tech that's there with the patient thinks like that, they  will often see what's going on and recognize some of the problems with that AHI, and  they'll comment on it right in the notes for the sleep doctor that goes into the sleep report.  But when you're doing the HST type of model, it's very common for them to just kind of go  straight to the AHI and then say, you know, it worked, it didn't work, stuff like that.  Date of Study & Patient BMI   [0:08:40]  All right, so the data of the study, why we have data of the study is there can sometimes  be a long time between baseline study and the oral appliance study. Patient BMI, why  would that be on there? Well, if you remember in level two as well, one of the reasons that  oral appliances fail is the patient gains 25 pounds. And so we're now dealing with a com -  pletely different person than had that baseline study. After you get burned on that a few  times, you may actually decide that you want to talk to the doctor in advance of treating  that patient. So let's say you get a patient, HST five years ago, their doctor does not feel  that another sleep study is indicated. You look at it, says that the patient's 170 pounds, you  09/01/25   Page   of 3   17

SSC 2.0 - 510: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 1  look at the patient sitting in front of you and you're like, you are definitely not 170 pounds.  And maybe they fill out in your forms how much they weigh, maybe they don't.  [0:09:36]  Assuming that they didn't fill that out on your forms, you ask, hey, curious, current weight,  210. Okay, we got a 40 pound increase and five years. Okay, does sleep apnea tend to get  worse or better as we get older? Tends to get worse, doesn't it? So at that point, you might  think to yourself, all right, this guy five years ago and 40 pounds ago had an AHI of 12. I  wonder what it is today. And am I going to look bad? And that's not our primary concern  here, right? Our primary concern is treating the patient. But nevertheless, are you gonna  look bad if you treat this patient and the AHI on the oral appliance study comes back at  12? That doesn't look very good, does it? From 12 to 12, if you're just looking at that num -  ber and not taking anything into account. So you might consider contacting the doctor that  referred the patient to you or contacting the patient's primary care doctor or their sleep  doctor or whatever, saying, hey, got this patient in for an oral appliance. I've done my den -  tal evaluation of the patient. They look like a great candidate for oral appliance therapy.  [0:10:43]  I have a question though. So the sleep study that I have, and maybe this is not the most  up-to-date one, but the one I have is five years old. The patient was 170 pounds at the  time. He's now 210 pounds. I am concerned that his sleep apnea might be much more se -  vere at this point than it was five years ago. It used to be mild. I'm not sure we're still deal -  ing with a mild case. Do you think it would be worthwhile to get another home sleep test so  we really know what we're dealing with or should we just move forward with treatment?  What do you think? That's exactly how I would say that. Okay, so I didn't tell them what to  do. I just said, what do you think? And then the person is going to then say what they  think. Now, presented in the way that I just did right there, if you put yourself in the shoes  of the sleep doctor or the primary care doctor, what are you gonna say? You're probably  gonna say, you know what? I think that's reasonable. I think that's a good point. Yeah, why  don't we get a home sleep test?  [0:11:41]  It's been five years. Our insurance is gonna pay for it. Actually, the doctor probably won't  say stuff like that, but that is true. So their insurance will pay for a new home sleep test.  You know how often you can get a new home sleep test? Every day if it was medically  necessary. So there's no limit on how many home sleep tests you can have. Medicare, as  a matter of fact, in that scenario that I just gave right there, wouldn't even pay for treatment  if the sleep study is not within a year old. That's something that we have butt heads with  sleep doctors on before because they're like, why do we need a new sleep study on this  patient? Clearly they still have sleep apnea. We're like, bro, we don't make the rules here.  It's Medicare says they have to have a sleep study within a year. This happened relatively  recently that a couple sleep doctors in our area were in the Boise area were kind of upset  about this. We've scoured the internet to find chapter and verse on this. Finally we did.  And then finally the sleep doctor, they did too. And they were like, wow, we had no idea.  [0:12:41]  09/01/25   Page   of 4   17

SSC 2.0 - 510: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 1  Okay, now the rule still applies for CPAP too. Just the CPAP folks had never kept to the  rule. They're just kind of rolling the dice that if they get audited one day and they don't  have that appropriate sleep study that nothing's gonna... you know, there's not gonna be a  problem with it. We don't do that. We tend to have all of our ducks in a row, right? You do  too. Okay, so back to the story. Consider that in advance. So I want you to avoid problems  here whenever possible, not just deal with problems. So watch for that. And if you're think -  ing, okay, person's five years older, 40 pounds heavier, man, I sure think that getting an -  other sleep study makes sense. Have a talk with the doc. Okay, and oh, and by the way,  let's say you do that. Doc's like, nah, we don't need another sleep study. Clearly the per -  son still has sleep apnea. Yeah, it might be worth, so what? Let's go. And you go and you  get the oral appliance and it comes back that the AHI is now 15 with the oral appliance.  But the patient says, wow, snoring is so much better now.  [0:13:46]  I feel like a million bucks. Okay, then the doctor's gonna take that into account and be like,  all right, you were probably right, dentist. Probably we're dealing with much more severe  sleep apnea now. Patient says they're doing better. Not gonna use CPAP in the first place.  Okay, we're cool. Okay, so keep that in mind.  Total Sleep Time   [0:14:02]  All right, next, total sleep time. Total sleep time, why is that of concern? Well, the AHI, re -  member, is the number of events divided by the time. So apneas and hypopneas per hour  is your AHI. I know you know that. But so to get that, if they have a really short sleep time  and they have a few events in that short sleep time, it can be an exaggerated AHI because  the sleep time was so short. Now, speaking of total sleep time, what if they had a home  sleep test that actually doesn't test for sleep? Okay, did you follow what I just said right  there? You're saying, Jamison, that some home sleep tests don't know if the patient slept?  Yeah, lots. So unless it's a watch pad, the ARIES unit, something that is using something  other than just straps and a nasal cannula, the traditional home sleep test that is not using  some sort of peripheral arterial tone technology can't tell if the person slept or not.  [0:15:11]  It's just a guess, right? So this is why it's important to apples and apples on the equipment  that's being used. The total sleep time can make a big difference in the math. So let's say  that they used a standard HST that doesn't measure them even sleeping, but on the oral  appliance one, on the baseline study, they kept the thing on for nine hours, and then on  the oral appliance one, they woke up after seven hours and felt pretty good, so they took it  off. And so it knows on and off, so one was a total sleep time of nine hours, and the other  one was a total sleep time of seven hours. That one that was seven hours, that's the divi -  sion number, right? So it's possible that that would increase the AHI because we're divid -  ing it by that shorter number, okay? Hopefully that makes sense.  09/01/25   Page   of 5   17

SSC 2.0 - 510: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 1  Sleep Efficiency   [0:16:13]  All right, next, sleep efficiency. Sleep efficiency is the percent of time that they are asleep.  If the sleep efficiency goes up, that's going to increase the amount of time that they could  have apneas. Now, that's something you want. You want greater sleep efficiency, yes. But  again, the airway's not collapsing when the person's awake. So if they had poor sleep effi -  ciency in the baseline, and now they have pretty good sleep efficiency, they had more op -  portunities to have apneas and hypopneas. So even though that's something we want to  see get better, that can be something that would possibly allow them to have more of  these apneas and hypopneas. Okay, then we have percent N1, N2, N3, and REM sleep.  Okay, with those, we know that REM sleep, sleep apnea is worse. So that's the main one  on there, but just be looking at it in general and see if there's a shift in any of the non-REM  or REM sleep. Looking, I like to look at that deep sleep, of course, because I know that  that's very important for the patient's overall health and their renewal. But REM sleep is the  one that if they go from having 5% REM to 20% REM on their oral appliance titration, what  could that allow to have more of if they have more REM? Well, more apneas and hypop -  neas, right? So watch for that as well.  % Supine Sleep, Non-Supine Sleep, and Supine REM Sleep   [0:17:43]  Okay, next is percent supine sleep, non-supine sleep, and supine REM sleep. Supine,  sleep apnea is worse, right? So the percentage here on the baseline and the oral appli -  ance titration is another area we got to look for because if they on their baseline study  never slept on their back, and this is far more common now with home sleep tests, by the  way, so with PSGs in the lab, they were told to sleep on their back. And not everybody  would, but they would at least try. And the sleep tech would say, hey, try to sleep on your  back, and then they had a thousand wires on them and stuff, so they felt like they had to  just kind of sleep there like a mummy in order to not knock stuff off. Now it's a home sleep  test, and I've not seen stuff from home sleep tests where it tells the patient to try to sleep  on your back. Never seen that. Usually kind of the thought process nowadays is that, you  know, do your normal thing, do your normal routine, let this be more like just normal, right?  All right, so if the person has sleep apnea, are they more likely to sleep on their back or  their side if they have sleep apnea? So here's a quiz question for you. If you have obstruc -  tive sleep apnea, are you more likely to sleep on your back or your side?  [0:18:58]  Okay, now understand how I'm asking that question. I'm not saying is sleep apnea worse  on your back or your side. I'm saying if you have sleep apnea, are you more likely sleeping  on your back or your side? You would more likely sleep on your side. Remember back in  09/01/25   Page   of 6   17

SSC 2.0 - 510: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 1  level one, telling the story of my dad and him thinking that the whole sleep stuff was a big  bunch of malarkey because they made him sleep on his back in the sleep lab and he said,  I never sleep on my back, I always sleep on my side? Well, that's because he had sleep  apnea. My dad's AHI was 81 in the sleep lab. On his side, he didn't have as bad as sleep  apnea. People with sleep apnea, their body will strategically move them to their side so  that they will not have as bad of sleep apnea. Okay, so that's another one to watch for. And  if you remember in level two, I talk about a case, a classic case where I had a guy that on  the baseline spent virtually no time at all, he spent 5% on his back, and in that 5%, he had  the vast majority of the apneas and hypopneas in that 5% of the original sleep study.  [0:20:07]  On the oral appliance study, he spent the entire night on his back. Why is that? Because  he could. So with the oral appliance's help protecting his airway, now he could sleep on his  back. So significantly more supine sleep. You will see that a lot. In my experience, the  sleep doctors or the primary care doctor who's just getting the report never go that far. So  this is gonna be up to you. So percent supine, non-supine, or non-REM supine, or excuse  me, non-supine sleep, and then supine REM sleep. Why supine REM sleep? Because  that's the worst of all, right? Or the most opportunity for the patient to obstruct would be  supine REM sleep.  Overall AHI   [0:20:55]  Okay, all right, let's move to the bottom of the form here. Our overall AHI, okay, that will be  prominently displayed. Then our numbers of apneas and numbers of hypopneas. Now this  one, if you go way back in the other levels too, I talk about this. So an apnea, of course, is  the person completely obstructing, and then our hypopnea is not all the way obstructing,  it's just a reduction of airflow, right? Now something I don't have on this list that I would  add now, and something that you could just make a note here and say, all right, I'm gonna  remember this, that Jamison said this, and I'll put this in.  [0:21:38]  So not just the number of apneas, but I would look at the average length of the apneas if  that's included. Now oftentimes that's not included, but I've taught you this before, but what  is worse as far as AHI is concerned? One 60-second apnea or four 15-second apneas?  What is worse as far as AHI is concerned? What counts more? Four 15-second apneas or  one 60-second apnea? Well, the four, right? Which one seems worse? Stopping breathing,  obstructing for 60 seconds, or stopping breathing four times over a period, but only 15  seconds each, only 15 seconds. Well, clearly, if you were obstructed for a minute, that's a  heck of a long time, right? That's gonna have a bunch of sequela, but it's only one. So  that's something we see. The number of apneas can actually go up, but the length signifi -  cantly decreased, okay? So instead of having a bunch of 30-second apneas, now they  have more, well, not more in quotes, there is technically more, it's a higher number, of 12-  09/01/25   Page   of 7   17

SSC 2.0 - 510: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 1  second apneas, but they aren't having the 30-second apneas anymore. Or far more com -  monly, what we see is they go from having apneas to hypopneas.  [0:23:13]  Once again, what is worse as far as AHI is concerned? One 60-second apnea or four 11-  second hypopneas? Well, geez, I'll take those four 11-second hypopneas any day of the  week. That's not that big a deal, right? I mean, a reduction of airflow for the 10 seconds or  more and a little DSAT, but geez, at least I didn't stop breathing for 60 seconds, right? Of  course, right. But that's not how it's scored. So your four 11-second hypopneas scores  four. And that person who stopped breathing for a whole minute and got that one apnea in  that same period of time, they scored less. So that is very common. I mean, very common  that there will be a change in the types of apneas, moving them towards hypopneas, and  the number will be higher, perhaps because there are more of these hypopneas and less  of the obstructive apneas. So watch out for that.  Respiratory Disturbance Index   [0:24:22]  Then we have our RDI, so respiratory disturbance index. Remember that that is our AHI  plus the RERAs, respiratory-related arousals. That's going to give us our RDI. So RDI  should always be higher than AHI. Sometimes you'll see sleep studies. It's relatively rare  nowadays, but they would use RDI and AHI interchangeably. They don't typically do that  anymore. Now what would they need to have in order to have RDI? Well, they would need  to be able to measure arousal. So that means a study that knows if the person's asleep or  not and has an arousal. Having said that, there are some devices out there that have  some sort of surrogate that they have figured out with like breathing, just a cannula, with  the flattening of the breathing, that that represents an arousal and a RERA and stuff like  that. Pretty sophisticated stuff. I believe it because they've correlated it with PSGs. But just  watch for that too.  [0:25:20]  Now why that matters is it could be that their RDI, if their RDI is higher now, but their AHI is  much lower, this could be the patient that doesn't feel that much better because they're  having all these respiratory effort related arousals. They're still waking up a lot. It's just not  meeting the criteria of a hypopnea or apnea. So their AHI could be reduced and the doc -  tor's happy about that. The patient doesn't feel that much better. That would be potentially  why. And I've got on there the number of RERAs. Average oxygen saturation. This is  common for you to see on the oral appliance titration that the oxygen saturation will go up,  will get better. And that's always positive.  [0:26:08]  So that's something to look for though, because if it gets worse, then there can be some  reasons for that too. The main one being, did they sleep longer? Back in the super olden  days when we did pulse oximetry on all of our patients, we would sometimes see people  09/01/25   Page   of 8   17

SSC 2.0 - 510: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 1  come back and we would have them do one night with the oral appliance and then one  night without the oral appliance with pulse oximetry. And every once in a while there'd be  somebody that was significantly worse with the oral appliance. And I fretted about that  quite a bit. And then finally some patient said, man, on the night without the oral appliance,  I barely slept at all. And I was like, I get it. It's not that they're worse with the oral appliance,  it's that they're not asleep without the oral appliance. So that's something to look for too on  that total sleep time. If we've got a bunch of sleep, then we have more opportunities for  desaturations and stuff like that. If they're just sitting in bed awake, then they're less likely  to have those things.  Supine AHI, Non-Supine AHI   [0:27:12]  Then we have our supine AHI, non-supine AHI. That's already covered that, but watch for  that because in that one classic study that I had, 5% non-supine on the first study, 95%,  excuse me. So it was 5% supine on the baseline study. And then if memory serves, it was  100% supine on the oral appliance titration. And this is a case where the baseline AHI  went from 25 and then the oral appliance was only 20. And the sleep doctor had said in  there, yeah, it doesn't look like it's working. But the patient was overjoyed. His wife was  thrilled. His snoring was gone. He felt like a million dollars. But previously he could only  sleep on his side because his sleep apnea was so bad. Now he could sleep on his back.  That was better for his back. He felt better. Everything was better. But it took me going  through the details of the sleep study to then point that stuff out to the sleep doctor. That  big overview of that or a big detailed jump into that. Of course, in level two, I go over that  as well. So you can go in there and get a little bit more details, a couple more pearls in  there if you want. But hopefully that helps you.  [0:28:24]  This form, especially if you're more of a beginner, is going to be worth its weight in gold to  teach you these things. After a while, you just know what to look for. So you should be  able, after you've done 50 cases, 100 cases, you should be able to go through and be like,  okay, here's this back. All right. And yeah, you know, you're human. I'm human. I'm going  to look at AHI. Why? Because that's what my doctors care about. So yeah, we're going to  look at AHI. We're not going to be like, ah, who cares about HI? So yeah, we're going to  look at it. And again, if it goes from 30 to 0, you're like, right on. Awesome. And you proba -  bly don't even look further because you're like, that's what they care about. That's what I  care about. The patient already told me that they're feeling better. Everybody's happy.  We're great. But ideally, you would go into those details there. And if you saw it's like, hey,  wow, you're desatting here still a lot, even though you're not having the apneas. Better talk  to the doc about that. What if we need to add some oxygen to you or something like that?  [0:29:20]  09/01/25   Page   of 9   17

SSC 2.0 - 510: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 1  Okay? All right. Cool. I hope that helps. So in addition to looking at the numbers and look -  ing at those, you know, more but shorter apneas or more hypopneas than before, all that  kind of stuff, what else? So what if we look at all of the numbers like, it's not the numbers.  It's the oral appliances. Is maybe not in the best position. Well, consider further titration of  the appliance, maybe adding vertical. If you remember back in level two, we talk about  that, that the reason that I add vertical is when I don't feel like going any farther forward.  And I know that that is not terribly specific, but it is a feel. That little bit there is a bit of an  art, is when you just kind of look at the patient like, that's far enough. Or you can play  around with it. I call this the 5-cent pharyngometer, so you don't need to spend $50,000 on  a pharyngometer. You can have the patient make a noise in the back of their throat, not  through their nose, pinch their nose, noise in the back of their throat, have them bring their  jaw into different positions, stack tongue depressors, bring them AP, see if you can get to a  spot where they just can't make that noise anymore, and then try to match that. Again,  they're sitting up awake, but nevertheless, that could be something that might help them.  Consider Combination Therapy   [0:30:37]  Consider combination therapy. If the oral appliance is doing the best that they can, you  can't make any changes, well, now we talk about, hey, what was it about the CPAP that  you couldn't tolerate? Extremely commonly, it's the pressure. So if it's like, well, what if we  had a way that we could reduce that pressure for you, what do you think? You think you  could tolerate it? And I've had most patients be like, yeah, you know what? I bet I could. If  it was way less pressure, my pressure was at 18, what are we talking, Doc? What do you  think you'd get it to? I think we could get it probably sub-12. Oh, I don't think I'd have a  problem with that at all. Cool. This is one of the reasons that I would argue with my friend  John Remmers about his device, the MATRx it was called, that was a device that would  remotely titrate the oral appliance, and his thought process on selling that was to keep us  dentists from trying to treat a patient that wouldn't respond to treatment.  [0:31:41]  Okay, so the sales pitch for the $25,000 device was buy this so you can know who not to  treat. And I told him that's a really bad marketing pitch, right? And way at the end of the  business, he finally took my advice and we changed the paradigm from you buy this thing  to figure out who not to treat to you buy this thing to get people in the ideal treatment posi -  tion as fast as possible and save yourself chair time and be confident in their treatment.  That was a winning pitch. And so a bunch of us actually bought it, and then the company  went bankrupt like three months later, so that kind of sucks. But that's the part of the ar -  gument that I would have with John over the years was, John, you don't understand. We  almost never have failures. Not everybody do we knock it out of the park with AHI, but we  almost always make people better. Very rare that we don't get people better. And we build  a relationship with these people as we're making them better.  09/01/25   Page   of 10   17

SSC 2.0 - 510: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 1  [0:32:47]  So even the people that don't have outrageous success, we usually are now in a relation -  ship with them where we can say, hey, Dave, I'm sorry that this only took your AHI from 60  down to 25. 25 is still not great. I don't think we can jack your jaw to the moon. So what  was it about CPAP that you didn't really like? What was the pressure? Well, would you  consider going on CPAP if we could significantly reduce the pressure by having you wear  your oral appliance in a comfortable position? Yeah, it's worth it. Let's try it. Okay, that's my  experience is we are very good at getting people to try combination therapy after they've  had this relationship with us.  Doesn’t Feel Any Better   [0:33:31]  Next, the patient that doesn't feel any better. Now, we've got a lot of content on this in Lev -  el 5 here and Deep Into Sleep and look at all of the different things we've talked about in  there, but let's cover some things that maybe aren't in those things on medications and  other comorbidities and all that kind of stuff. So number one, predict it. Okay, predict it.  And may not have covered this in Level 2, so perk up your ears now because this is a little  clinical pearl for you.  [0:34:05]  Always ask the patient who tried and failed CPAP, "Did you feel better when you were us -  ing CPAP?" And I sometimes will even expand upon that to like, hey, did you ever get even  a few nights where you wore the CPAP all through the night? And if they say, well, you  know, yeah, at first I got a few nights in. Do you feel any different? Nah, no, I never felt any  better on CPAP. Okay, that's not great, right? Because CPAP blows the airway open, so  we know that it worked and they didn't feel any better. Now, there is an exception to that  rule. That exception to that rule is people with mild sleep apnea. So people with mild sleep  apnea, CPAP is often worse than their disease. Okay, like for real, not a joke. So blowing  air up their face and they're like, no, my gosh, on CPAP I was 10 times worse. Okay, that  one, that kind of makes sense, right? So they have more mild problem. Now we got this  machine and that disturbs their sleep so they feel worse.  [0:35:11]  Okay, so I'm talking more moderate to severes. And what you're looking for is, well, yeah,  you know, I did wear it for a while and then it started irritating my skin or it started bugging  my wife or whatever it was. And yeah, you know, I did feel better. Good. That's the impor -  tant thing. Another pearl here, this is one of the reasons I talk about this in level two when I  talk about combination therapy or just treating people that are happy with their CPAP. One  of the reasons I love treating people that are using CPAP successfully is you use them to  titrate their oral appliance. You just have them wear their CPAP with the oral appliance un -  til you get to a certain point that you say, all right, when you've got a Saturday that you  don't got to go to work, you don't have to do anything, you could be tired all day Saturday,  09/01/25   Page   of 11   17

SSC 2.0 - 510: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 1  that's the first night I want you to wear the oral appliance without your CPAP. And then  we're going to see how you do. And your goal there is to have that patient titrate their oral  appliance until they feel the same as they feel on CPAP, without the CPAP.  [0:36:10]  They know what it feels like to be treated. They know what it feels like to have that airway  protected. You use that knowledge of that feeling to titrate your oral appliance. That can be  pretty awesome. So this is important. And as I have the note here, this is particularly true  for older patients. So sometimes people in their 70s plus just don't feel better. And then  you've got to have that kind of conversation with them like, all right, it's possible that this is  going to help you, but you may not feel any better.  Baby Aspirin or Vitamin Analogy   [0:36:41]  This is the analogy I use with that. So the baby aspirin or vitamin analogy. And I'll say, "Do  you take a baby aspirin or vitamins every day to improve your health or decrease your risk  of something?" If you do, if you missed a day or two, you wouldn't feel any different. Oral  appliance therapy may be the same for you. It's helping you, but you might not notice a  huge difference. Okay? So I like to use that analogy before starting treatment. So if you  are using this after they're already in treatment and they're like, ah, this isn't making any  difference at all.  [0:37:15]  Do you take a baby aspirin? Yeah. Okay, well, what if you missed a day with your baby as -  pirin? Are you going to have a stroke that day? No. Okay, well, this is probably like that. It's  helping you. You just don't feel any different. That's like now that's an excuse. That's  sounding like you're making something up. On the other hand, if you ask this question in  advance, do you're feeling better in your CPAP, stuff like that, and this is mostly for CPAP  failures that we're talking about here, and they're like, no, I didn't really feel any better on  the CPAP. Okay, curious. So I see on here, here's these medications you take, or do you  take any vitamins or things like that? Yeah, you know, I take a vitamin. What happens if  you forget to take your vitamin? Do you feel poorly that day or whatever? Now, what would  kind of screw this up if they're like, oh, yeah, man, if I don't take my B vitamin, I feel like  crap that whole day. Okay, but most of the time with this analogy of a baby aspirin or a  multivitamin, that's not something that if you miss it, you're going to be like, oh, okay, yeah,  my day's just ruined because I forgot to take my baby aspirin this morning.  [0:38:21]  Use that analogy. I've had many patients over the years, hundreds of patients over the  years who did not feel any different at all with their appliance therapy, but we knew it was  helping them. Okay, and so they did it because they believed me and their doctor that it  was helping them, but if they forgot it or went without it or something like that, it wasn't that  they noticed a huge difference.  09/01/25   Page   of 12   17

SSC 2.0 - 510: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 1  Follow Up Sleep Study   [0:38:46]  Other things we're looking for on the patient that doesn't feel any better is getting a follow  up sleep study. You may notice that on the Facebook forum when people ask about this  topic, I've got a patient and I'm treating them and they're not feeling any better, or side ef -  fects, I've got a patient and they've got jaw pain. I am typically going to say, and usually  there will be other Spencer Study Club members that will bring this up too pretty quick, and  the question will be, is the appliance working? And we don't mean, is the appliance work -  ing that they don't have jaw pain? We mean, is the appliance keeping the airway open? So  if you've got somebody and they're not feeling better, they've got some of these other  things we'll talk about here in a minute, always be thinking, is this thing actually doing what  it's supposed to do?  [0:39:32]  Because if it isn't, then, well, no wonder. So if they are still having a bunch of apneas and  hypopneas and oxygen desats, well, no wonder they don't feel any better. So go ahead  and get that objective study. Now, this normally, it's snoring less feeling better, right? So  you could titrate the appliance a little bit, but if you've kind of screwed around with them a  bit, and it just does not seem to be making a difference, I would get them back for objec -  tive measurements pretty quick, because then if you get that objective follow-up and it's  like, yeah, this is working, so your AHI's gone from 30 to two, and you still don't feel any  better, then we're gonna go through some of these other things we're gonna talk about.  Comfort Issues   [0:40:10]  Next, take care of any comfort issues, even if the patient thinks they're minor. A analogy  that I'll use here, and I say this in level two as well, when you're just fitting the appliance  initially, is “Anything that bothers you a little bit here is going to bother you way more at two  in the morning”. Now this is beyond the initial fitting though, and the person may not know  what you can do. They may just believe that they have to tolerate whatever it is. Because  again, what do they know about oral appliance therapy unless this is somebody that's  worn appliance multiple times or different appliances over the years, and that's not the  person we're talking about right here. We're talking about the person that is in treatment,  not feeling any better, and presumably this is the first time they've done oral appliance  therapy. So you want to get really specific. And you also, if they really can't get anything to  you there or tell you anything that's bothering them, you look for things that could bother  them from your experience with other patients. Feel on the appliance for anything that's  slightly rough. Look for it being overextended in areas. Look for being bulky in areas. Is  there anything that you can do to make it feel a little bit better? And again, even if they  09/01/25   Page   of 13   17

SSC 2.0 - 510: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 1  don't have any comfort issues per se, if you can do something like, hey, let me take this.  This looks a little bulky right there.  [0:41:33]  Let me try something. And you can grind off a little bit of plastic and you can smooth it out.  Now ideally your assistant would do this or you would tell them that your assistant did this  so that they have confidence in your assistance. But let's say you come back and you give  them the appliance back and they put it in there like, oh wow, that feels a lot better. Then I  would say, okay, this is remember in diagnosis, we don't like to have a lot of placebo effect  in treatment. Bring it on. Placebo's our friend. So if you have that patient like, oh man, that  feels a lot better now. You know what? I bet that's it. I bet that was a little bit uncomfortable  for you even though it wasn't like a really big deal for you and you're not complaining about  it or anything, but I'll bet that feeling better now, I bet that's going to make a huge differ -  ence. Okay, just say that. There's been other people like you that just a little minor adjust -  ment like this, it felt a little bit better to the patient, that made all the difference in the world.  Okay, let's hope that's the case here too. Yeah, man, I think that's going to be the case.  Look at All Other Sleep Hygiene Aspects   [0:42:31]  All right, next. If you know the appliance is working, AHI-wise, so you've looked at the ob -  jective numbers and whatnot, patient also says they're snoring less, things like that, then  go into all the sleep hygiene details and covered here in level five in the getting your best  night's sleep and covered in level one with the original sleep acronym for hygiene. Go over  that stuff and make sure that they're giving themselves enough time for sleep, that they  don't have the light exposure, that their environment is good, that they're exercising, that  they're making a priority. All the stuff that we talk about with sleep hygiene, now is a good  time to talk about that and look for any issues that there could be there.  Consider Any Medications   [0:43:16]  Next, any medications and or combinations of medications. That's another area in level  five here, the reason we go over this. Now you know if you've watched it in this order that  there's a whole boatload of medications that can cause people to not sleep well and there -  fore not feel any better. Now's the time, if you haven't already, to dig deeper into those  medications. Now when I say if you haven't already, it doesn't hurt to, once you're familiar  with some of these medications that are known problems, to bring it up in advance. Not a  problem to tell people in advance, kind of in that informed consent phase of, you know,  because of this medication you're on, you might still be drowsy during the day. Because  you're taking sedative medications, you might still be drowsy. Because you're taking am -  phetamines, because you're on Adderall as an adult, that may disrupt your sleep. And  09/01/25   Page   of 14   17

SSC 2.0 - 510: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 1  maybe there'll be a way to get you off of that drug or reduce the drug or something like  that, but just heads up, that could have something to do other than the anatomical thing  that we're treating. And the patient would be like, oh, okay, cool. So that's nice to do that in  advance, but not terribly necessary. If you don't go into detail on that in advance, then that  one is okay, I think, to be like, oh, you know, I noticed this up front that you're on this med -  ication, and sometimes people that are on this medication don't feel as good because of  whatever.  [0:44:54]  Okay, I was hoping that just with protecting your airways, we know this is done. Okay, re -  member, this is a case where the AHI is good, the airway is protected, but they're not feel -  ing better. That's when you're like, you know what, I was hoping that you would be like  other people, that this medication doesn't seem to have a big impact. I think it may, in your  case, let's talk to your doctor about it.  Nutrition, Light Exposure & Exercise   [0:45:16]  Consider nutrition, light exposure, exercise. We go into go down those roads. Have the pa -  tient talk to the sleep doctor about possible weight-promoting medications, if indicated, or  regarding other non-OSA-related sleep disorders. Not a big fan of putting people on drugs,  as you know, but what really this bullet point is saying is feel free to punt back to the sleep  doctor. If you know the oral appliance is working and the patient isn't feeling any better,  punt to the sleep doctor and see if the sleep doctor will go into more depth of what could  be going on, or they may put them on a weight-promoting medication.  Can’t Tolerate the Oral Appliance   [0:45:59]  This next one is a pretty tough one. So this is the patient that just can't tolerate the oral  appliance. This tends to be a real drag because in my experience, this isn't what I'm talk -  ing about, the patient that has a comfort issue and can't tolerate it because it's rubbing  their cheek or something. That you can usually deal with or it's too tight on their tooth and  it's waking them up. Well, you can adjust that. This is the person that you're asking them,  what is it about the appliance that you don't like? And they say, "I just don't like it." Well,  that really doesn't give you much to go on, right? If the person can articulate to you what it  is that they don't like about it, all right, then you can work on that. It's too tall. It's too small.  You know, I need the vertical higher. I need it more protruded. I need it less protruded. I  need it tighter. I need it looser. Listen to your patients on this stuff when it's at this point,  right? If they're trying their best, they are really being a good patient and they're not feeling  better and they've got an idea. Okay, I may have told you the story before of the patient  that thought his appliance needed to be a lot higher, a lot taller.  09/01/25   Page   of 15   17

SSC 2.0 - 510: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 1  [0:47:14]  And I was like, I don't think so. And he wanted it really, really, really high. There was no  way he could close his lips around it at the position that he wanted it, but he wanted it  there. So I'm like, all right, dude, I think this is nuts. Let's go for it. Why not? You're with  yourself 24 hours a day. Maybe you know yourself better than I do. And we did it and it  worked. Placebo? Did it work because he wanted it to work so that he didn't look bad? I  don't know. It worked. Who cares? So ask the patient if you can get anything out of them.  Great. But I've had some people that are just like, I don't know. I just don't like it. And you  can't do anything with that. So what we do in those cases is we fit a temporary appliance.  And this works like 80% of the time, which always surprises me, actually, even though I've  done this so many times over the years. Now, let's put this in perspective. How often do  we do what I'm about to describe? Almost never. I would say in a given year, once or  twice, maybe.  [0:48:15]  And we average 80 to 100 sleep patients a month. So not a lot. So you could go years and  never have this happen to you. So anyway, what we do is we say, all right, well, before we  just give up, because you've already given up on CPAP, right? And you're not willing to go  back on CPAP, I assume. So let's try this temporary device. And we use the Silent Sleep,  the one that I created with the GC Reline. And I'll be darned if about 80% of the time, they  don't tolerate it well. I don't know why that is. And sometimes I've flirted with the idea of  moving them to something like a Moses or something like that as a monoblock. But once  you've got something that they like and that they'll use, you just ride that horse, right? You  don't switch horses now. So that has worked about 80% of the time when you get to this  situation of, I just don't like it. And it's like, well, before we do, before we just let you go,  let's try this.  Get Used to the Appliance Slowly   [0:49:17]  Another idea is have the patient try to get used to it slowly. Now, they have to have the  complaint of, I don't like this for whatever reason. And if you can't take care of that reason,  then something you can do is, well, let's just try to wear half of it. And you can do it any or -  der that you want to. And with the patient, because they may say, well, the upper doesn't  seem to bother me that much. Okay, great. Let's do the upper. If they say the lower, they  prefer, great. Let's start with the lower. And just have them sleep with half of the appliance  in for as long as it takes. So there's no real rush in any of this. There's no value in this be -  ing over. The patients, if you're an insurance-based practice or a fee-for-service practice,  there's no big winner in this if you just kick them out, you're done. I guess if you refunded  their money, then they would be done, but they're still not happy. Even though you've given  their money back, they didn't come to you for a piece of plastic. They came to you for an  09/01/25   Page   of 16   17

SSC 2.0 - 510: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 1  outcome. So, yeah, this is a case that you're not going to make as much money on, that's  for sure, but you will learn from it and they will really appreciate it.  [0:50:32]  And you don't have to have them coming in all the time. Once you've got those initial com -  fort issues taken care of, what's the point of them coming in and taking your chair time? So  you can do all of this via telemedicine. Your staff member could walk the patient through  this. Let's start with half. Let's wear that for at least a week. Make sure everything's cool.  At a week, I want you to call me. All right, how's it going? You're fine wearing that for a  week? Great. Now let's wear the lower with the upper, see how that goes. Let's say that  they're like, ah, man, I really struggled to wear both of them. Okay, well, just wear the low -  er then one. So we wore the upper for a week. You didn't have a problem? Let's wear the  lower one for a week. See how you do. Okay, I can wear the lower one. I can wear... we've  decided now I can wear half of the appliance. All right, now let's try putting them together  again. And, you know, not putting them together with bands or connections or whatever,  but just wearing an upper and a lower at the same time.  [0:51:27]  And let's say they go, well, yeah, I can't do that. All right, now we've got a little bit of the  piece of the puzzle there. And that piece of the puzzle is that it's potentially vertical. So  maybe can you slam that appliance down to reduce that vertical dramatically? Or could  you shift to a different appliance? Could you maybe do, so right now as I'm filming this, a  nylon EMA style appliance or a printed EMA style appliance or a Silent Nite from Glidewell,  those are really low vertical. And so maybe you try that. Maybe you even charge the pa -  tient. Like, hey, I got an idea. There's an appliance on the market that is super duper thin.  And you got to be careful with this because you can't be like, let me just cover the lab bill.  But you say, hey, I can talk to them and see if I can get this at a bit of a discount. I know  that, you know, it's $3,500 for the treatment, but I think for like $800, I could get this just to  kind of cover some of the costs and stuff. And the patient will, if they're serious about get -  ting better, they may be like, okay, yeah, that sounds good. Okay, be careful with, don't  ever say, I'll just charge the lab. And then also talk to them why they couldn't tolerate CPAP  and bring that up, combination therapy, things like that.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 17   17

