SSC 2.0 - 301: TMD Introduction  SSC 2.0   Level 3  301: TMD Introduction  [intro music]  Advanced TMD   [0:00:12]  Hello, welcome to Level 3 and some Advanced TMD. In this level, we're gonna go over  everything that you really need to know, frankly, to help people with TMJ problems. And as  you may have heard me already say on earlier videos, dental sleep medicine is the gate -  way drug into TMD. [laughter] And probably you got involved in Spencer Study Club be -  cause of dental sleep medicine, although, year after year after year, we're having more  people that are joining specifically for the TMD and they feel that they're already more or  less experts in sleep and oftentimes they are, but they feel a little weak on the TMD stuff,  and so they join Spencer Study Club for that. And please, if that's you, welcome. If you just  went straight here 'cause you're like, okay, that's really what I wanna learn about, is the  TMJ stuff, then welcome as well. However, I'd like you to go back to Level 1, and review all  the anatomy stuff.  [0:01:12]  So in Level 1 is where I talk about the all TMJ patients being nuts, not understanding their  symptoms, go through all of the anatomy and the wiring, so the innervations and the mus -  cles and the joints and everything that is really the foundation, for what we're gonna talk  about now. And please, please, please review that. As a matter of fact, I would go so far as  to say, watch that multiple times, because anatomy really is the key for these things and  understanding these problems as well as communicating to others. As surgeons, as den -  tists, we want to fix things. We are anatomically oriented.  [0:01:59]  In dentistry, we're looking at anatomy, like dental anatomy and deciding what to do based  on what is wrong and what needs to be restored. And having this anatomical approach will  help you to talk to your colleagues, and talk to the oral surgeons, orthodontists, periodon -  tists, and just the other general dentists. Frankly, that's one of the advantages of a  anatomical-based approach versus a central type of approach or that it's all about prob -  lems in the brain itself. I am more of a periphery kind of guy, that this is more of a periph -  eral problem. Certainly there are systemic problems that can lead to TMJ problems and we  talk about some of those things. But even then, oftentimes where the rubber meets the  road for us is, let's say, drug interactions that are causing clenching and grinding, and then  we're dealing with the fallout of the clenching and grinding and of course, we're always  gonna try to get to the etiology, and that's why I also go back to Level 1. So Level 1 is go -  09 /01/25   Page   of 1   21

SSC 2.0 - 301: TMD Introduction  ing to talk more about the etiology, going to talk about the airway and connecting those  things and all that kind of stuff, okay.  Magical Machines?   [0:03:14]  But, in this session, we're going to kind of jump from that first, the Level 101 grouping  there, the Level 100 Spencer Study Club videos, where kind of brought you through this  and that you could stun your patients and be someone that understands now, and we're  gonna go into a lot more detail on splint therapy and things like that. Before I go into those  things, here's the deal. There's a lot of people out there who want to sell you magical ma -  chines, and I have had, I believe, everything that is on the slide here. I've had home sleep  testing equipment. I've had bite testing equipment. The original T-Scan I had, I don't even  remember how long ago that was, but I think it's over 20 years ago now, probably. Maybe  23, 24 years ago. It had a serial port attachment, and for most of you watching this video,  you may not even know what that is. So that was my old computer and a serial port at -  tachment. It was like this big and had a couple wire clippy things on the side. That's what  you would plug in your Okidata dot matrix printer to.  [0:04:32]  You've seen one of those if you've been to the airport, because they're still using those dot  matrix printers. That's what my T-Scan did, and the newer T-Scans, I don't know that  they've actually changed that much, other than now they're USB, of course, or USB-C at  this point, or something like that, or maybe even wireless for all I know. Who cares? But  the idea is, I had that. I had the BioPAK, which is the bio-research's version of the K7 and  those things for jaw tracking and EMG and joint vibration analysis, and all these sorts of  stuff. I've had it all. I've had the Doppler, which is down here in the corner. Get my pointer  on the screen here. Down here on the corner, that's Doppler. My gosh, that had been  around for 20 years before I even started practicing. It's basically ultrasound, except only  for sound. So it was able to hear the joint clicking very distinctly, and you could put it, if you  held it right where it is on that picture there, you would hear the temporal artery and  whoosh, whoosh, whoosh of that. Had all that stuff.  [0:05:44]  My partners, Dr. Kuehne and Dr. Mangelson, who practice with me, have had none of this  stuff with the exception of a Cone-Beam, and we don't have an I - CAT anymore. We have a  Vatech. It happens to be the one that we have currently in 2025, at both of our locations.  But we had one of the original I - CATs in our practice in Boise. A prosthodontist and myself  went in together to buy it, 'cause that $300,000 at the time was a little expensive for either  of us to do individually. We've had it all. My partners have the Cone-Beam. That's what is  left. None of the other stuff. Why don't they have any of the other stuff? Because I didn't  find that it changed how I treated anybody, with one exception. And I will give credit to my  $30,000 at the time purchase of the BioPAK stuff for teaching me this. And let me tell you  09 /01/25   Page   of 2   21

SSC 2.0 - 301: TMD Introduction  this story right now, and I mentioned this in the muscle stuff back in Level 1, but let me re -  peat myself if you don't mind.  [0:06:50]  I had a patient, and we have her all hooked up to the stuff, and we got the EMGs on and  everything, and she would clench. So one of the things you would have people do is  clench your teeth as hard as they can and then stop, and you'd have the temporalis and  the masseter wired up as shown in this picture here. So you'd have these different mus -  cles, and you would see what happened in the EMG activity of these muscles. And she  would do that, and it wouldn't really move. Like there's just nothing really showing on EMG.  I'm like, wow, that's weird. And she reported being in pain a lot and having difficulty chew -  ing and all these things. And I thought, well, maybe my machine's broken. It's not calibrat -  ed correctly or something. And eventually, I literally put my fingers in between her teeth  and asked her to bite as hard as she could. And she couldn't hurt me. Whereas if you're a  real dentist, people can usually put enough force on your fingers to make it hurt. Right?  She couldn't. And that was probably worth the 30 grand right there, because it helped me  realize something, that then changed how I viewed a lot of stuff with TMJ problems. It  helped me realize that this person's problem was atrophy of the muscles and mastication,  not hypertrophy.  [0:08:17]  We treat everyone in TMD as if they're a clencher grinder, as if they're some chronic  clencher grinder. And we'll talk more about that later. We've talked about that in Level 1  with my Couch to 5K analogy or my trained athlete analogy. And we tend to think of a lot of  these parafunctional behavior people, as kind of trained athletes as in they are clenching,  grinding their teeth all the time. Although now when you kind of think about it a little bit, it's  like, well, does that make sense that they would have pain? The marathon runner doesn't  have pain when they go out and run five miles or 10 miles, even if they do it every day.  Why would they have pain? So this experience changed my life, and changed the lives of  many patients that I've seen since then and many, many more that I don't even know,  'cause the ripple effects of me teaching you this right now, which is that woman, she need -  ed to strengthen her muscles of mastication, because they had atrophied so much that it  hurt for her to do just normal activities of daily living. So thank you to bio research for sell -  ing me the stuff that gave me that lesson.  [0:09:26]  And no one had ever talked about that. I've never heard anyone else talk about that, other  than me. And there's a lot of people out there, that have this equipment and I'm sure that  they've seen it. They must have. And I've had many other patients over the years, that  have had this problem. And this is why I talk about giving people gum chewing exercises,  that I had them chew gum on purpose to help them strengthen their muscles. All right, so  there's a little clinical pearl as we get started here, is watch for that, but you don't need  $30,000 worth of equipment to figure that out. You know what you need? Your fingers. If  you put your fingers on their masseter, and they bite down and you don't feel any contrac -  tion at all, boom! Just saved you 30 grand on that. So my partners have been taught how  09 /01/25   Page   of 3   21

SSC 2.0 - 301: TMD Introduction  to do everything they need to do with not having to buy any of these things. I like to con -  sider myself as the low BS guy. And that's where BS stands for buying stuff, actually, not  what you thought it was, buying stuff. I'm the low-buying-stuff guy. And we, over the years,  have not usually been bleeding edge kind of people on technologies at least, or maybe I  should say that a different way. I don't tend to promote or encourage Spencer Study Club  members to be on the bleeding edge.  [0:10:56]  We will, so we're just getting into 3D printing of oral appliances and stuff like that. And we  were there a decade ago on the bleeding edge, and we bled a lot. We went through stuff  with 3D printing, cost us literally a quarter million dollars, because we had to remake all the  appliances that we made that were 3D printed. And that stung. That stung a little bit. That  hurt. Now we're more confident. And so, you can rest assured, if there's something I tell  you on these videos or whatever, it's from personal experience. And also, if I say, hey, you  need to get into this, it's because we already know. That's because we already know. So  magical machines, be careful. Lots of salespeople out there, and they'll make a good case.  And it's not that the machines are bad or that they give you bad information. It's just you  don't need them. There's easier ways to do it other than Cone Beam CT. I do think you  need that one.  Magical Plastic?   [0:11:56]  And what about magical plastic? There are so many different pieces of plastic out there  that will make all sorts of claims. And we've talked about that again in Level 1, and I'll bring  it up here as well. But I really want your thinking about, well, when would that plastic actu -  ally do something? Let me give you the sneak preview right now. Remember 1% occlu -  sion?  [0:12:18]  Okay? Fascinating to me, I have talked to multiple people over the years, some recently,  who have invented various magic pieces of plastic. And I will ask them, well, so curious,  how much time should someone have their teeth together? And universally, they always  say, never. They always say, well, they shouldn't. Very little. And then I'll be like, okay, well,  then when does your appliance do something? 'Cause your appliance is moving the jaw,  it's giving support, it's reducing the muscle contraction. When? And they'll usually be con -  fused. Because it's weird, 'cause within the same head, lives the idea that teeth shouldn't  be together much, and teeth are together all the time. I swear, that's living in their same  head. And it doesn't make any sense. So the plastic we're gonna talk about in this level, is  going to be directive, but we're going to come at this with the knowledge of, hey, this is  kind of only gonna help certain people, or the effect they're gonna have, is going to de -  pend on how much time their teeth are together. And the appliance choice we make is go -  ing to be from this.  09 /01/25   Page   of 4   21

SSC 2.0 - 301: TMD Introduction  [0:13:44]  And what we do, is going to help us understand, from this point of view of 1% occlusion,  we're going to be informed on our choices. Because someone who is rarely putting their  teeth together, is going to have a much different response to something you do with a  splint than somebody who has their teeth together a lot. And the people who have their  teeth together a lot, we'd kind of like to move them towards 1% occlusion, of course. So  there's not a magic piece of plastic in it. Again, fascinating, and I hope you will find this  fascinating too, when you go to courses, when you see stuff online, and people will, oh  yeah, I've got this magic splint, and I've got this, and I've got that. And I'm sure that in their  heads, in their hearts, they also believe that their piece of plastic is magic. Partly, that's  just because they have had good outcomes. But those outcomes are oftentimes in spite of  the splint therapy, not because of it. They think it's because of it, but it's frankly in spite of  it.  [0:14:54]  It's because virtually any piece of plastic will make someone aware of what they're doing,  and if you can take someone from being a five or 10% occluder closer to a 1% occluder,  they're gonna get better. They as well. I don't care what you put in their mouth. If you just  make them aware of what they're doing during the day, and that's enough to get them to  change that behavior, they're gonna feel better. So, are there magic pieces of plastic? No,  there's not. These are just instruments in our hands, and you can use different things. And  this is why also, by the way, you'll see in Spencer Study Club, you'll see in the Facebook  group, stuff like that, if people are like, oh yeah, I did this, or I added this thing to the front  of it, or I did this. And I won't usually tell them, oh, well, that was dumb, why didn't you use  this? I'll say, well, why do you think that that would help, and when is that actually going to  work? Under what circumstances is adding that NTI-like protuberance onto the front of the  sleep appliance going to make a difference? And then usually they'll be like, well, I guess  when they clench their teeth.  [0:16:00]  Right. So if it's only when they clench their teeth that that would make a difference, now  the follow-up question is, why are they clenching their teeth? Do they still have an airway  problem? Is that why? Are they trying to protect their airway? Is this so-called parafunction,  actually protective function? Is it one of the medications they're on, since there's dozens of  medications that can cause Bruxism? And back in Level 1 again, where I go over the Brux -  ism stuff and things that can cause people to clench and grind their teeth, you know what?  Nobody kind of knows is what happens when there's multiple medications.  [0:16:38]  There aren't a lot of studies out there where it's like, hey, this person was on this SSRI,  and this anti-anxiety medicine and this heart medication. Those studies don't exist. It's too  many variables. So what is the real number of medications that can cause people to  clench and grind their teeth? Who knows. But that's what we should be asking is always  think about, it's not about the person's banging their head against the wall and we'll give  them a helmet, okay? Back to level 1. It's about why are they banging their head against  09 /01/25   Page   of 5   21

SSC 2.0 - 301: TMD Introduction  the wall? Now we might need to give them a helmet. You come up against someone who  is banging their head against the wall, please, by all means, give them a helmet. But also  discuss with them, yeah, it'd be nice to figure out why you're banging your head against  the wall.  Is There Magic Plastic?   [0:17:33]  Is there magic plastic? Nope. It's kind of funny as I'm recording this, we're getting ready for  the ADSM meeting of 2025. And a company just put out a marketing thing, and the head -  line of the marketing piece is like, the first appliance that opens the velo and oropharynx  and guides the soft tissue and stuff like that. I'm like, whoa, that's interesting. And then you  look at it, and it's the exact appliance that they've been marketing for years and years, but  now they're making claims of, well, this guides the tongue into a certain spot, and it does  this, and it does that. It's like, does it? [laughter] Unless it's got a bulb on the front of it that  sucks the tongue forward when you stick it in the bulb, I don't think that that's gonna be the  case in everybody. Are there people that their tongue would come forward? Sure. But that  happens to me with this appliance here, with an EMA. I wake up and my tongue is right in  between those two trays there. But on the other hand, when I wear a tap appliance that  has the metal there, my tongue's up as forward as it can be as well. So I don't know that  there's a magic appliance that does that.  Bottomline   [0:18:50]  I guess, kind of my bottom line, don't fall for the hype and marketing, particularly from peo -  ple that don't even do it. When you hear from people that like, oh yeah, I did this, hey,  yeah, awesome man, that is so cool to try that effect. Curious about how many people  have you treated with that? And then, see what they say. And if it's less than a few hun -  dred, I don't know that I would really pay that much attention to what they have to say. And  particularly if it's very few, 'cause it's a new thing or whatever. And then just kind of under -  stand, well, what have they done in the past? Being involved in this career as long as I  have, it's been interesting for me to see so many kind of gurus that bounce from one com -  pany to another company as the spokesperson for that company.  [0:19:39]  If you're newer to this field, you would not know that history. So you would just assume  that that person has always been with that company or whatever. But I know better, 'cause  I know these people for a long time. And it's also fascinating to me, because I know a lot of  these gurus, and I know their practices are not profitable. And that they make money be -  cause of their relationships with these companies and speaking tours and stuff like that,  09 /01/25   Page   of 6   21

SSC 2.0 - 301: TMD Introduction  because they don't in their own practice. Not the people that you want to be paying atten -  tion to, that you want to be following.  [0:20:10]  When they're talking about the magic plastic, it's to make money for the magic plastic  company. There's no magic plastic out there that you couldn't make in your lab, in your  own lab, in your garage, if you put a lab in your garage, that would be any less special  than whatever magic plastic they have, if it looked the same, whatever. 'Cause remember,  all these things are, as we'll talk about in just a second, custom made.  Magical Methods   [0:20:35]  What about magical methods? Well, there's a lot of this out there too. And on the internet,  of course, is every magical method possible. There's videos of chiropractors cracking peo -  ple's jaws so loud that you can hear it across the room. You can hear it absolutely on the  microphone. There's people doing stuff against muscles supposedly, doing things in peo -  ple's noses, believe it or not. There's all sorts of crazy stuff. There's dry needling tech -  niques. There's all sorts of stuff. But there aren't really a lot of magical methods of getting  people better. And again, I don't fault or blame the people that are out there pushing these  things and the Botox and all the stuff, 'cause they're theoretically trying to help people get  better.  [0:21:29]  What does bother me a bit, is they don't tend to try to get to the etiology. They just try to  use whatever magical method it is they have, to cover up the symptoms. And try not to do  that here. Try not to teach that here. We're gonna teach you the methods, but that's what,  again, level 1 is for, is to help you go through the diagnosis. And we're gonna re-go  through all of that stuff in this session. Why? Because it's the most important thing. It is all  about the diagnosis. If your diagnosis is wrong, it is uncommon for the treatment to be  right. It is possible 'cause you get lucky, but it's much, much stronger if you have an accu -  rate diagnosis, that you're going to come up with a good treatment plan. And then, some -  times that's gonna be skill.  [0:22:22]  So I could see somebody with a missing tooth number eight and be like, all right diagnosis,  missing tooth number eight, and we need to replace that. But I personally would not have  the skills to replace number eight to be perfect with the rest of their teeth and absolutely  gorgeous. You might have those skills. I don't. I have skills in other areas, TMD and sleep  mostly. But that's my point is there, the diagnosis would be pretty easy. The treatment  would be kind of hard. Usually in TMD, the diagnosis is the hard part. The treatment is  pretty easy. However, that doesn't mean that it's necessarily always simple. And it doesn't  mean that you don't have to put in your reps and get good at something.  09 /01/25   Page   of 7   21

SSC 2.0 - 301: TMD Introduction  There is ONE Magical Method!   [0:23:10]  Now, there is though one magical method, and this we also talked about in level 1, and  that is PRF. And in level 3 here, I have a whole section just on PRF. And PRF does seem  to be dang near magical. Of course, it's not magic. It's just giving the body what it needs in  order to heal itself. Now, think about that, though. Does PRF get to the etiology of the  problem? And the answer would be, not necessarily. Because if it has been a breakdown  of their joints due to parafunction perhaps, then maybe whatever caused the so-called  parafunction is the true etiology of why they had that breakdown.  [0:24:00]  Now, sometimes, as we'll talk about in a bit as we go through history and stuff, it doesn't  matter. 'Cause the etiology is so far back, that we have a problem now in front of us, and it  doesn't matter what the etiology was. You'll hear, and you may even be this person your -  self, of people that were swimmers in high school or maybe even the college level or  whatever. And then they're in their mid to late 40s or 50s, and they're having shoulder  surgery and stuff. And they'll kind of take it back to, yeah, a bunch of overuse of my shoul -  der joints as a swimmer when I was younger. Well, that would be the etiology. The etiology  is you hurt your shoulders when you were a 21-year-old swimmer. That doesn't necessari -  ly help us when they're 51. It helps us to understand the why, perhaps, but then the how  we're gonna treat them, is going to be different. And that's where PRF comes in, 'cause  PRF you might need for your neck, you might need for your back, you might need for your  knee or hip. And yes, it would be helpful for us to know, okay, well, I think I have this  breakdown because of this, but that may not change anything.  [0:25:16]  We might still just kind of put the PRF in there to give your body the best opportunity pos -  sible to heal itself, or to heal it to the best level that it can. And then ideally, we would do  things to try to protect that area as well. So PRF, I don't lump in under the magical meth -  ods. When I use the term magical obviously, I'm being sarcastic. So I'm saying that there's  no such thing as magical plastic. There's no such thing as magical machines. There's no  such thing as magical methods unless married with the right diagnosis and the right treat -  ment plan, then yeah, methods can be very, very, very helpful in the big scheme of things.  So PRF is, we need to kind of go into this whole level here of the advanced TMD and the  multiple videos that will come after this. Remembering that, and I'll remind you plenty, don't  worry about it, but I've taught this before. So if you, and you do, you have access to the  original videos of SSE 1.0, and you can go back and watch those if you want to. And you'll  note that I don't say the letters PRF, 'cause I didn't know about it back then. We weren't  doing it at all. And that is something that I actually take a lot of pride in, is that this go  through, you are learning new stuff.  [0:26:48]  09 /01/25   Page   of 8   21

SSC 2.0 - 301: TMD Introduction  Now, if you're new to Spencer Study Club, and this is just your first go through, then you're  getting it now. If you've been a member of Spencer Study Club for a long time, this is new  stuff, you know that. Now you've gotten this new stuff over the years because as soon as I  find something awesome, I share it with my Spencer Study Club members. But I'm so  pleased, that I'm not shooting the exact same content in 2025 that I did back in 2017, I  think it was, when we first put everything together for Spencer Study Club. I would be a  little disappointed with myself frankly, and the field in general, if basically eight years later,  there was no advances, there's no changes, there's no improvements. We were doing the  exact same thing that we'd always done for our patients. That wouldn't be very cool. So  you're lucky if this is you getting started, 'cause you are at the best time in history with re -  gard to treating TMJ problems so much easier, when we have the body harnessed to heal.  One Size Does Not Fit All!   [0:27:53]  All right. So one size does not fit all. This difference between one size fit all and made to  measure. You've heard me talk about that oral appliance therapy for sleep apnea, talked  about this in level 2, is bespoke, it is custom made. There's never been a sleep appliance  that is exactly like another sleep appliance. They're all snowflakes. Even if you had your  own appliance made from the same company twice, it wouldn't be exactly the same. It'd be  subtle changes, subtle differences. Even if it was 3D printed, if it was milled, it'd be a little  different, because of just the nature of how these things are made. But the take-home  message there, is that it's all custom and it's you trying to figure out what's best for that pa -  tient. Same thing when it goes to splint therapy and stuff like that. These are gonna be  custom orthotics for that patient, designed with something in mind from you of having a  certain effect. And that's gonna be important as we go through here.  [0:29:10]  Again, if you post something to the Facebook group or you use the little magnifying glass  there to go find something that's been discussed in the past, and you'll notice that a ques -  tion I often ask is, what do you hope to do with that treatment? You gave that person an  NTI-style appliance, what do you hope to accomplish with that? You gave them this, what's  your thought process behind that? And then they'll kind of explain their thought process.  And I will never criticize anybody for coming to a conclusion, that is on a foundation of log -  ical thought. That they're like, well, I thought or I think this is what's going on, and so I did  this appliance because of this thought process. And I'll be like, right on. And then typically  I'll also be, have you thought about this? Have you considered that? And that's where they  kind of grow and go, oh well, actually I hadn't considered that. And oh, okay, that makes  sense. Most dentists, and probably you at this point, are coming at this from the whole, the  idea that the teeth are touching the squint all the time, and that kind of guides why you do  what you do. Even though, again, if I asked you how much time should people spend with  their teeth together, you would say very little.  09 /01/25   Page   of 9   21

SSC 2.0 - 301: TMD Introduction  Dr. Spencer’s Super Awesome TMJ Diagnosis Kit!   [0:30:33]  All right, so here's my super awesome TMJ diagnosis kit. Now, this has not changed since  2017. These are some of the things that we use in our practice to this day, that are super  valuable and important to us. One is a ruler. And I'll show you in a minute that you don't  have to have a ruler, but it's nice to have a ruler, so I think I would invest the 35 cents or  whatever it's gonna cost you to get a ruler. Gebauer's Instant Ice. I'll talk more about that in  a minute with something called Spray and Stretch. A tongue depressor. When we're figur -  ing out retrodiscitis and stuff is helpful. The Aqualyzer, water-filled splints that moves the  water from one side to the other when someone's bite is off, and we're trying to reduce im -  pact on the joint to help with that healing. That is very helpful. It could be connected with  PRF. And a syringe. And using anesthetics, and you could also have kind of a medical sy -  ringe on here for a PRF. Now, this is a diagnosis kit though, so what I'm using a syringe for  in diagnosis, is diagnostic injections, and that is giving a little bit of Carbocaine usually, to  see if you can numb up that area, which is you figuring out site and source, site and  source of the pain.  [0:31:51]  It hurts here. We get the shot there. It's like, oh yep, pain went from eight on a 0-10 to  zero. Right on. We are in the right spot. That's for sure it, versus someone has a toothache  and you think it's muscle. You infiltrate the tooth, and it's like, no, that still kind of hurts.  Well, that doesn't make any sense, 'cause it seems like it's in your tooth. Then you find the  muscle. You anesthetize the trigger point in that area, and they're like, oh, my tooth feels  better. That would be where the site of the pain, their tooth, and the source, their muscle,  are different spots. That's where diagnostic injections come in. Super duper duper duper  helpful for you to understand that. That's why the anatomy is so important, 'cause if you're  just kind of throwing treatments at people, and particularly if you're wrong on what they are  doing. For example, you think that they have a temporalis trigger point, so you give them  an NTI-style appliance, because you think, oh well, that's gonna make it so they can't  clench their teeth, but in reality, they aren't clenching their teeth in the first place.  [0:32:53]  That really wouldn't help you that much, but you could use that maybe diagnostically,  'cause if you did use an NTI-style appliance, and they're like, oh my gosh, that makes a  huge difference. What did you just learn? Well, apparently they were putting their teeth to -  gether a lot, and now you put that thing in here, and maybe they're still putting their teeth  together, but you've made it mechanically disadvantageous. You've created a mechanical  disadvantage there, that when they bite on their front teeth, they can't contract their anteri -  or temporalis quite as much. Does that make sense? Diagnosis is key. These are all things  that we use in diagnosis.  09 /01/25   Page   of 10   21

SSC 2.0 - 301: TMD Introduction  The Mystery is in the History   [0:33:27]  All right, so here's kind of our go back a little bit to the level 1 stuff, and let's talk about the  mystery being in the history.  [video playback]  You've seen the joint videos here now a thousand times. Please, please, please make  sure that you are really, really comfortable in what's going on, on these videos. And some -  thing that I kind of like to point out here, and okay, so I stopped the videos there.  [end of video playback]  Normal Condyle   [0:33:56]  And what I want you to kind of look at, is the distance here from the top of the condyle to  the top of the fossa. Top of the condyle, top of the fossa, that's a long flipping way. So the  disc is fat, skinny, fat. The condyle here, the fossa is way up here, goes literally off the  screen, comes back down. That's the articular eminence. Note that the top of the condyle  is almost all the way down to the bottom of the articular eminence in occlusion. So that is  with the cadaver right there, teeth together presumably, assuming they have teeth, and  there's a lot of space there, and the condyle is sort of down and forward, but it's not down  and forward, that's normal. Make sure you really, really, really, really get this, to the point  also that you could teach it to colleagues of yours 'cause they do not get this. Probably you  didn't get this either until you kind of went through this stuff. So, that's normal, and now we  compare that to all the rest of the stuff, and you see how far away everything else is from  normal.  Reducing Disc Displacement   [0:34:59]  So, on the reducing disc displacement, we have top of the condyle and top of the fossa,  top of the condyle, top of the fossa. You even see my pointer move. So, it's just barely a  difference there, a couple millimeters, and of course, there is no room for the disc. The  disc has to be squirted out in front, 'cause it couldn't be on top of the condyle if it wanted  to. And here, once again, we presume that the cadaver's teeth are in occlusion at this  point, and the disc has no place to be. It has no room to be there. Big deal. Note the posi -  tion of the condyle with respect to the articular eminence. So the normal over here, top of  the condyle and the bottom of the articular eminence are darn near at the same level, with -  in a couple millimeters of the same level. Here, we have, I don't know, 10, 15 millimeters  between the bottom of the fossa and where the top of the condyle is in occlusion.  [0:35:54]  09 /01/25   Page   of 11   21

SSC 2.0 - 301: TMD Introduction  So, that condyle is superiorly displaced, way up high, more so than it should be. And if you  go back to level 1, we talked about centric relation and those definitions of most superior,  stuff like that. That's why you weren't taught any of this stuff in dental school, is your  teachers were taught wrong. And it's just been this whole perpetual thing of not under -  standing the anatomy of the jaw joint. Lots of people do understand it, but it's just not  taught and passed down of what normal is. And then, once people come in and that's their  bite, then it's kind of like, oh, there you go. That is what it is. 'Cause that's been built. It'd  be like, you go around to people's homes and you're like, your foundation is kind of  messed up based on the house that you've built on top of that foundation.  [0:36:44]  That would be sucky news to give people. 'Cause what are they supposed to do about  that? I know you can go in and change foundational stuff without starting over with the  building on top, but it ain't easy. So this is one of the problems we have in this field is, if  there is no solution, there is no problem. The solution of some of these things may require  a bite change. And most of our patients don't wanna go through a bite change, be that  through orthodontics or crowning the teeth or whatever. A lot of our patients couldn't if they  wanted to, just financially, they don't have the wherewithal to do that. So if there's no solu -  tion, there's no problem, so we just don't bring it up. And this is why you never in your ca -  reer in dental school, how many full mouth reconstructions did you recommend? Now, you  did dentures. [laughter] That's a full mouth reconstruction for people. So get that. But other  than that, for people that had teeth, was that something that you talked about that much?  Probably not. And you saw lots of people with lots of problems.  Non-Reducing Displacement   [0:37:50]  Okay, moving on. Non-reducing displacement, same deal. We got top of the condyle, top  of the fossa, top of the condyle, top of the fossa. No difference. Makes sense, 'cause here  from reducing, we are on that retrodiscal tissue in occlusion, and here we're still on the  retrodiscal tissue in occlusion. The only difference between the reducing displacement and  the non-reducing displacement is what? In the non-reducing displacement, it does not click  anymore. In the reducing displacement, it pops on and off. Non-reducing, doesn't pop on  and off anymore, and that's confusing to everybody, because popping seems bad, not  popping seems good, but it is just basically we never have, unless we're gonna do some of  the stuff we're gonna talk about in these coming sessions here, we bring the person into  true centric relation, meaning on the disc, then they would go from reducing displacement  to normal position.  [0:38:45]  That is gonna result in a bite change, possibly, and then we have to put on top of all that  stuff 1% occlusion, because if they spend almost no time with their teeth together, then  they're not going into these positions here. If I don't spend a lot of time with my teeth to -  09 /01/25   Page   of 12   21

SSC 2.0 - 301: TMD Introduction  gether, then my condyle is actually not here. It would be more towards this, if I have lips  together, teeth apart. And then, of course, we have our DJD, where there's no soft tissue  anymore, and that's kind of a bone-on-bone situation.  [0:39:17]  Now, with our PRF and all that kind of stuff, we're gonna come back to this a bunch of  times, because there can be healing things occur that would result in a bite change, and  many of our members in 2025, as I'm recording this, are starting to see this, and I've pre -  dicted that we'll see this more. Now, good news, my partners who have done more PRF  cases than anyone else in the world, are not seeing permanent bite changes that they're  having to address with crowns or orthodontics. We still think it's gonna happen. We still  think there's gonna be people that basically can't wean off the splint therapy that we'll talk  about later, and so I want you to be prepared. Now, if you watch the original Spencer  Study Club videos, I told you back then to always tell people that there might be a bite  change, to always do that, even though we're weaning off 99.9% of our patients.  [0:40:13]  Now with PRF, that might go from 99.9 to 98, maybe, or 99.2, or I don't know. But I think  there's going to be people that they're just like, you know what, I'm just so much more  comfortable in this position, and I eat a lot of salads, so I need to get my teeth together to  grind that lettuce, and therefore I want to make this change. We're gonna tell everyone  that that might happen, but with PRF, it is logical to conclude that with some coming back  of the bone, with some repair of the soft tissues, that it's possible that in some people that  may result in a bite change, that the body would have a hard time just adapting to on it's  own.  Chief Complaint - MAIN THING that is Bothering a Patient?   [0:41:00]  All right, chief complaint. What's the main thing that's bothering the patient? I was listening  to a YouTube video unrelated to TMD stuff the other day, and the person asked, the doctor,  it was two doctors talking to each other, and they said, "Yeah, I'll ask the patient, has this  impacted your quality of life at all? Or how has this impacted your quality of life?" That's a  great question.  [0:41:30]  So that's a great question to add to your repertoire with sleep and TMD. Hey, tell me, how  is this, how is sleep apnea? How has your snoring? How has your jaw pain? How has this  impacted your quality of life, if it has yet? And by the way, notice I put yet at the end of that.  So if it has yet, so it's going to, have you noticed how it has impacted it yet? And then  they're gonna tell you, and that's gonna typically be their chief complaint, not necessarily.  Sometimes you will have different chief complaints 'cause sometimes they're worried more  about what their family thinks or whatever, literally their chief complaint could be that, well,  my family makes fun of me at dinner 'cause it pops so loud, that they they get all super  09 /01/25   Page   of 13   21

SSC 2.0 - 301: TMD Introduction  grossed out about it. That could be their chief complaint. And that could affect their quality  of life, but they tell you, "Well, yeah, it impacts my quality of life 'cause I have headaches  all the time. That makes it really hard for me to work and to concentrate and stuff like that."  But then, they also got this thing with their family having a problem with it, and they may  focus on one or the other.  [0:42:41]  So what is the most important thing to them, is going to be really critical for you to get out  of them. Why? So that you know what they care about. And for example, with the clicking  example, I just gave a second ago, how likely is it, that you can stop their jaw from clicking  without changing their bite, particularly if they aren't good at 1% occlusion? Let me ask  that question again. How likely is it, that you're gonna get them to stay on the disc all the  time, without changing their bite? So currently, to back up a slide, currently when they bite  down, they're off the disc. And then when they open, they go pop onto the disc. How likely  are you to keep them on the disc all the time, without necessitating a bite change? Well,  it's very unlikely that you're gonna do that. So even people with 1% occlusion, theoretically,  when they bite down, they're gonna pop back off that disc. 'Cause again, there's just no  room. So it's not that they don't wanna stay on the disc, it's that there's just no room for the  disc.  [0:44:07]  There's no room in the end here, folks. So when they bite down, pop, squirt, off it goes. So  even people with 1% occlusion, are going to theoretically squirt. Now, why do I keep say -  ing theoretically? 'Cause it depends on how hard they put their teeth together and how  much they put their teeth together, and in what circumstances they put their teeth together.  So the reason I mentioned earlier a salad eater, so to eat salad, you have to put your teeth  all the way together and grind. To eat meat, you don't. Notice that even with chewing gum,  your teeth don't typically smash into each other. And maybe that one or two millimeters be -  tween the teeth posteriorly, is enough to keep the disc in place. So bottom line there  though, is in order to keep them on the disc all the time, you're going to have a bite change  there. It just doesn't make sense that they're going to be able to stay on the disc all the  time otherwise. And if their chief complaint is, yeah, I can't stand this clicking, this clicking  is driving me and my family nuts, then you're gonna be very strong on, hey, here's what we  might need to do in order, and we'll show the TMJ demonstrator here to show them what's  going on.  Multiple Complaints   [0:45:24]  All right. Now, if there are multiple complaints, then I like to use my magic wand example.  And I'll say, if I had a magic wand and could get rid of any of your pain problems, but only  one at a time, what would you have me get rid of first? And that's a nice way that if they're  like, yeah, I have headaches, I have jaw pain, and it hurts to chew, and the clicking both -  09 /01/25   Page   of 14   21

SSC 2.0 - 301: TMD Introduction  ers me, and I've got ear congestion, and ringing in my ears, and ear pain. You're like, okay,  right on. I understand you've got all these problems. That sucks. If I could get rid of them  one at a time, put them in order.  [0:45:56]  Just one at a time. I had a magic wand. I can make them all go away, one at a time. Tell  me what. And then that'll get you down to the true chief complaint. It is common, and you  may have seen me do this before in a bigger lecture, I will sometimes say to the crowd, so  here's your patient and their chief complaints are jaw pain, headaches, or pain when  chewing, so jaw pain, pain when chewing, headaches, and popping and clicking. And then  I'll say, what's the chief complaint? And I'm kind of baiting them there a little bit, using  some Jedi mind tricks there, 'cause even how I say that, and I deflect down on popping  and clicking at the end and put it last, is I'm kind of encouraging them to determine what  they think the chief complaint is. And it works darn near every time. [laughter] That I'll have  a bunch of people be like, oh, pain when chewing, that's the chief complaint. Other people,  oh, the headaches, that's the chief complaint. Almost never will someone say clicking is  the chief complaint. And that's 'cause you've been brainwashed in dental school to be told  that, oh yeah, clicking, yeah, lots of people clicks, no big deal.  [0:47:07]  It's kind of funny, I don't think in physical therapy school they're like, yeah a lot of people  out there with dislocated shoulders, no big deal. But we're taught that in dental school,  how come? 'Cause there's no solution, so there's no problem. And usually then someone  in the crowd will be like, well, it depends on what the patient says is the chief complaint.  I'm like, bingo, that's right. So the reason you need to be crystal clear on what they care  about, is there may be also times that you can't make their chief complaint go away com -  pletely, just like, ergo, the example I just gave. If you have somebody and it is all about the  popping and clicking, and maybe they have headaches, maybe they have jaw pain when  they chew, maybe they have all that other stuff, all the other stuff could go away, and they  would still be like, but you didn't help me. You're like, what do you mean I didn't help you?  My jaw still pops and clicks. You're like, yeah, who cares? I care. That's the whole reason I  came to you. And you're like, well, in order to change that, we're gonna have to change  your entire bite.  [0:48:06]  Oh, okay, well, you never mentioned that. How much is that gonna cost? Well, anywhere  from 7,000, if we can do it orthodontically, to 50,000, if we have to do it with crowns. What?  I never even would've started a treatment if I knew that that was gonna be, I don't even got  seven grand. Okay, get my point? So you need to understand what's going on, and have  these conversations up front with the patient, so that you're on the same page with, can  we help you with this chief complaint or not, or what are the odds of helping you with this  chief complaint? Okay, hey, pretty good chance we could do this. Here's the stuff we're  gonna try. Here's what might happen. Could you live with that? If we got you to your not  popping and clicking the vast majority of the time, but you still pop and click every once in  09 /01/25   Page   of 15   21

SSC 2.0 - 301: TMD Introduction  a while, would that be okay? Yeah, that'd be okay. All right, cool, now we're on the same  page.  Pain Assessment - OPQRST   [0:48:50]  Chief complaint, super-duper important. Went over this in level one, too. So this is  OPQRST. If you were in a emergency room, they're gonna ask you OPQRST. And with  OPQRST and range of motion, you're gonna have a really good idea of what's going on.  So O, onset, P, provocation or palliation, Q, quality, R, region and radiation, S, scale or  severity, and T, timing.  O - Onset   [0:49:19]  Okay, Onset. When did the problem begin? What were you doing when it started? Now,  the when did it begin could be, and this is common as you get more in treating people with  TMJ problems, it is very common for people to say, yeah, this all started after I got my  braces off and then you don't immediately throw the orthodontist under the bus and like,  yeah, that's 'cause they suck, and they retract everything and pull pre-molars and yeah,  darn orthodontist, they probably caused your problem. So it's potentially growth and de -  velopment related if it started out in their teen years and may have had something to do  with their orthodontics, but the orthodontics didn't just like cause it. If they were a 1% oc -  cluder, it's very possible that they wouldn't have a problem, if they weren't spending too  much time with their teeth together perhaps.  [0:50:08]  But in that example too, let's say that the person who says, yeah, this all started after or -  tho, I think, and now they're 50. Who cares? Again, it's important to find that out, because  it's very, so the who cares, what I mean by that is, it's much different from a person that  says, "Well, I was biting on something, I was chewing something and I bit down on some -  thing hard, like a rock, and that is when I hurt my jaw." Or, "Well, I was playing Ultimate  Frisbee, and my friend and I ran into each other and I hit his shoulder and into my jaw. And  now, my bite's all off and it really hurts, and that was last Thursday."  [0:51:01]  The onset is important if it's forever ago, more kind of chronic problem, then we're kind of  switching gears from, okay, I understand that that could be when it started, even trauma.  Well, yeah, this all started after car accident 15 years ago. So not much we can do about  the car accident anymore. So now our kind of question is, well, why do you continue to  have a problem? There's lots of people who have been injured and they're okay. Profes -  sional athletes all the time have injuries, sometimes major injuries, and then those injuries  are repaired and they recover and they do physical therapy and they rehabilitate them -  09 /01/25   Page   of 16   21

SSC 2.0 - 301: TMD Introduction  selves, and they're back on the field and everything's good. Why is this person not? Why  have they not been able to rehabilitate to an appropriate level? Onset, and what were you  doing when you started? So that's the first, that's the O in OPQRST.  P - Provocation   [0:52:02]  Provocation and palliation, this is what makes it worse and what makes it better. Provoca -  tion, what makes it worse. Palliation, what makes it better. And so, they may say, well, it  gets worse when I chew. They may say, well, it gets worse with stress. They may even  say, clenching right in my teeth makes it worse. They may say, well it's like I wake up and it  really hurts. And all of those things are gonna give you information as to when it hurts and  what is going on when it hurts. The person who says, it hurts when I sleep, that's a big red  flag of like, okay, weird why would that hurt when you sleep? Now, if you're of a certain  age, as I am, you know that at some point, and I think this is in, for me, was like in my late  40s maybe, that all of a sudden you start waking up with discomfort. [laughter] Prior to  that, if you're now below 30 or whatever, you don't even know what that is. You're just like  you wake up every day, and you feel fabulous. But you get to a certain age, you're like,  hmm, I wake up and my back hurts. Why does my back hurt? And this is why people buy,  like myself, multi-thousand dollar mattresses and sleep number beds and all the different  things that we have to do, so that we can feel better. [laughter]  [0:53:20]  And my wife's side of the bed is different than my side of the bed, and all that kind of stuff.  And when we travel and go to a non-sleep number bed and whatnot, we kind of suffer a  little bit 'cause it's not like what we've got set up at home to make our sleep all good. The  point is, you're gonna take what they say makes it worse, and help you think through, well,  why would that be? Why would it be that chewing makes it worse? That one's a little bit  obvious. Why would it be that sleeping makes it worse? Whereas a lot of musculoskeletal  things you would lay down, you would take a load off in order to feel better. And in this per -  son, it seems to make it worse.  P   - Palliation   [0:54:01]  Palliation, sometimes is kind of the opposite of what they'll say makes it worse. So they  may say, well, medications make it better. And that could be, well, what kind? And Advil  versus Tylenol, that can help you understand this a little bit, 'cause Tylenol is not an anti-  inflammatory, Advil is. So if they say, well, Advil seems to make a big difference. I tried  Tylenol, that didn't seem to help as much. Then you know that there's some level of in -  flammation that is possibly to something you need to look into there. They may say, well, a  soft diet versus the hard diet. And that would again, be consistent with, all right, well,  09 /01/25   Page   of 17   21

SSC 2.0 - 301: TMD Introduction  chewing or opening wide to chew or certain type of foods, putting pressure there, maybe  that's it. Now, don't immediately go to the, all right, well, only soft diet forever.  [0:54:51]  Maybe this person needs to strengthen their muscles and mastication like the story I told  you before. Maybe they say, relaxation makes it better. So what's going on with the stress?  Why is a clenching, grinding behavior being induced? Is it day? Okay, are they aware of  clenching or grinding their teeth during the day? Or does it seem to be more of a nighttime  issue that this is going on?  Q - Quality   [0:55:18]  Quality. This is our sharp, stabbing, throbbing, burning, aching type of stuff. And remem -  ber, with our OPQRST and everything that we're doing in diagnosis, we're looking for  things to make sense. So ask the questions and you're looking for it to make sense. Now,  this is gonna take some reps for you to get real comfortable with like, well, that doesn't  make any sense. For example, sometimes they'll say something like, well, it's a sharp,  constant pain. And it's like, those two things kind of don't go together.  [0:55:51]  And if you've ever had a sharp pain, you didn't have a sharp, constant pain, or you would  have went to the ER. Yes? Like yesterday, for example, I had got done with a pretty rigor -  ous mountain bike ride with my son, Josh, and the last part of it, was on a dirt road. So all  the rest of it was on single track mountain bike trails and stuff. We did this big thing  through the mountain and then we got down to kind of a ditch road and followed the road  back to my son's house. And so, we were kind of crunched down almost like a road bike  type of style. And it really kind of had to contract my abs to be in that position for that last  10, 15 minutes of the ride. And we get into his house, and I'm kind of standing around. I go  and I sit down on the couch and kind of crunch my abs to get on the couch.  [0:56:45]  And I had like a charley horse in my abs, which I never experienced that before. That  sucked. So that was a sharp pain. I was literally pushing around with my hand thinking,  man, did I just throw a hernia or something? Like I just herniated or something? 'Cause,  ow, this hurts. And then it went away. And I was on the phone with my wife. I'm like, oh,  hang on a second. I'm like, oh my gosh. Yeah, I just had what probably is a contraction,  except mine only lasted one minute, thank goodness. [laughter] And if that would have  lasted for more than one minute, I would have been on the way to the emergency room,  guaranteed. [laughter]  Can you Describe the Pain?   [0:57:29]  09 /01/25   Page   of 18   21

SSC 2.0 - 301: TMD Introduction  Now that may make some of you women laugh, but us men are pretty much wieners when  it comes to pain and stuff like that, so don't be too surprised. My point is, it wasn't sharp  and constant. So sharp and constant don't tend to go together. And they're definitely not  making an appointment for the TMD person, you, to talk about their sharp constant pain.  They're going to the emergency room if they have a sharp constant pain.  [0:57:51]  So if they say that, you say, all right, so sharp, I get that constant? So sharp and constant.  I think you'd probably be at the emergency room if it was constantly sharp. And they'd be  like, oh well, that's not what I mean. I mean that it will be, man, it'll just, there's kind of this  constant low-grade, dull ache kind of thing. And then every once in a while, bang, I get this  sharp pain. That totally makes sense. And remember too, that we're dealing with muscu -  loskeletal pain here. This is an anatomical thing. It's not from their brain. It's not central  nervous system mediated, usually. Those are different problems. So you probably, as a  practicing dentist, you probably got some musculoskeletal pain yourself. You got the neck  pain, the shoulder pain, the hip pain, the back pain, the whatever pain you got. You got it.  You know this stuff. So you know dull ache. You know move into a certain position and ow,  and you know get in a different position and okay, that's a little bit better right there. Same  thing with this musculoskeletal pain, should be consistent with your experience with other  areas of musculoskeletal pain.  R - Region and Radiation   [0:59:01]  Region or radiation. Have that patient point with one finger to where it hurts the most. I call  this the one finger test. And this will kind of goes together with the magic wand one thing at  a time test, is I'm trying to rule out and rule in what is it that's bothering them the most and  where is this coming from? Are there radiation of pain? Is this potentially trigger points my -  ofascial pain? And remember, go back to level one to refresh your memory on that. But  this is trigger points and referred pain oftentimes into teeth in the area that we're working  with here in the head and neck. So that is region and radiation.  S - Severity   [0:59:42]  Next is S for severity. And I'm sure you probably remember this, and that is zero is no pain.  10 is the worst you can imagine. For example, being burned alive. If you started with level  1, hopefully you've already put that into your repertoire. If you started here first, start that  immediately. Zero is nothing, no pain, zero. 10, burned alive. And that's not to be funny  that we ask that. It's to make something that is by definition subjective. Pain is subjective.  There's no blood test for pain. There's no X-ray for pain. Everybody reacts differently to  pain. And there's no such thing necessarily, so to speak, as a high pain tolerance. There  09 /01/25   Page   of 19   21

SSC 2.0 - 301: TMD Introduction  are different thresholds that people have when they do little tests with a pin prick or some -  thing like that, and how sensitive someone is to stuff. And you may have people in your life  that are super sensitive to being touched in a certain area or something like that.  [1:00:46]  Okay, but pain tolerance, that's more of a between the ears kind of thing there, and people  will say that and they tend to wear that as a badge of honor. I have a really high pain toler -  ance. [laughter] I don't know if you do or not, 'cause it's completely subjective, and that  that person again, they're proud of that fact. Great, good. But I still need to know, zero is  nothing. 10 is being burned alive. I don't know too many people out there, that burned alive  like they have that level of pain tolerance where they could just burn themselves, and  they'd be like, yeah that's a little, that bothers me a little bit. Okay, not gonna happen.  [1:01:26]  Zero, nothing. 10, burned alive. Ask it three ways. What is it on average? What is it at it's  worst? What is it at it's best? And when they answer, let's see, at its worst? Pretty bad.  Seven, eight, I'd say. On average maybe four. At it's best, two. If anybody says, at it's best,  if they say anything other than zero, you need to follow up with, so you're telling me it hurts  all the time. So for a little, so you're not saying it hurts a lot, but two means a little. And  they'll usually back off and be like, well, no, it doesn't hurt all the time. There's sometimes I  can kind of lay just right or if I've been really relaxed that day, or if I've been really careful  with what I eat, then it doesn't hurt. Yeah, I'd say it is zero from time to time. Okay, that's  normal. So if you have musculoskeletal pain anywhere in your body, you know that it  would be abnormal for it to hurt all the time. You would usually be able to get into some  position in a hot bath lane in a certain way. That's gonna make it not hurt. It'd be a zero.  'Cause again, if it was hurting all the time, you would tend to do something about it.  T - Timing   [1:02:55]  And then lastly is timing. And this is when does it bother you the most? All the time, which  is a little weird. Morning, afternoon, or evening. Random, which is the worst. After meals or  when eating. So random being the worst is 'cause then, that's back to our provocation or  palliation question. And these are, you're correlating these two. So they're like, oh yeah,  man, the worst thing is when I eat. And then you get to this question, it's like, so time of  day, stuff like that, that it bothers you the most? Oh, it's kind of random. Is it? You'd have to  go back to that first question and be like, well, you said a minute or so ago, that it's worse  when you eat. Oh yeah, totally. So, when you say random, you mean 'cause you just eat at  random times? Well, no. Yeah, that's a good point. So yeah, it's worse at lunch. It's worse  at dinner. I tend to eat a really soft breakfast. It doesn't really bother me that much for  breakfast. Okay, so make sure these things correlate with each other.  [1:03:55]  09 /01/25   Page   of 20   21

SSC 2.0 - 301: TMD Introduction  And then, this last one here that hurts mostly when I chew, is a fun one because this is the  one that most dentists choose to ignore because it's like, all right, the patient tells you right  up. It's like, yeah, man, when I'm eating, that's the thing. That's the thing that's bothering  me here. You're like, okay, cool. Here's a night guard. Wear this when you sleep. I'm like,  well, why should I wear this when I sleep? My problem isn't when I sleep. My problem is  when I eat. Like, yeah, I get it, but I mean, you don't say this out loud, but it's, well, there's  no solution, so there's no problem. The solution is I'm gonna give you a splint to wear  when you eat.  [1:04:31]  What the world? Okay, yeah, we're gonna talk about that. Why would you give them or  why would you not, frankly, give them something that's going to change their behavior,  change the forces, protect the joint when they have the problem? Back to the bang the  head against the wall analogy. Doesn't do much good for the person who's banging their  head against the wall to wear their helmet when they sleep. They need to have their hel -  met on, when they're banging their head against the wall. So think that through, but there  have been so many, probably literally millions of people at this point, that have been treat -  ed and their chief complaint is, it hurts when I chew and the dentist is like, "Cool, wear this  when you sleep."  [outro music]  09 /01/25   Page   of 21   21

