SSC 2.0 - 217: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 2  SSC 2.0   Level 2  217: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 2  [intro music]  Sleep Apnea Review   [0:00:12]  All right, so let's go over a few things. I know it's not been that long since you've kind of  gone over this, but let's just reinforce some stuff here as we get into the sleep studies and  going through the reports and stuff. Repetition is a mother of skill. Sleep apnea definitions.  Apnea is a cessation of ventilation for 10 seconds or more. So remember from me talking  about this before, that means if someone stops breathing for 9 seconds, it doesn't count.  These home sleep tests or PSGs have algorithms built in that they are detecting these  things. They are detecting an apnea, a cessation of ventilation for 10 seconds or more.  And that's what it says, it says 10 seconds. And you're like, well, 9 seconds, if it's 9 sec -  onds, that's almost 10 seconds, that should count. Well, no, because that's how it's set up.  It's set up that now, again, when you look at the data and look at the sleep histogram,  you'll see an apnea. And if you blew that up to where you had what the sleep tech has,  where you're able to see a few minutes instead of the whole 8 hours condensed into one  sheet, if you looked at that, you'd be like, oh, well, there's an apnea there, there's an ap -  nea, there's an apnea, there's an apnea. So this is, I encourage you to go to a sleep lab,  spend a few hours with a sleep tech at least, and they'll show you this. They'll be like,  "Yeah, there's an apnea, but it's only six seconds." Okay, so it doesn't count. Okay.  Sleep Apnea Definitions   [0:01:49]  Hypopnea, 30% reduction in airflow for 10 seconds or more with an arousal or a desatura -  tion. And then apnea-hypopnea index, average number of apneas plus hypopneas per  hour of sleep. RDI is the AHI plus respiratory effort-related arousals or RIRAs. Okay, some  other definitions that you are already familiar with. AHI less than five is considered normal.  Remember my example that I used of somebody having a dog wake them up throughout  the night. So just because that is considered normal does not mean the person will feel  good. If you were woken up two, three, four times per hour last night, you wouldn't be  watching this video right now   'cause you'd be too tired. So keep that in mind. This is very  important. A lot of this stuff is from stupid insurance rules and whatnot, and it's just doesn't  make a lot of sense. And clearly,   someone who has 4.4 apneas per hour versus somebody  09/01/25   Page   of 1   11

SSC 2.0 - 217: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 2  who has 4.6 and we can round up to five, that doesn't make one person symptomatic and  the other person not symptomatic. So there's not a correlation with that.  [0:03:04]  But nevertheless, these are just kind of the definitions. But push back on these definitions.  Talk to your patients about this. They will understand that this is why this is important for  you to understand sleep studies is the person is like, "Well, yeah, they said it was normal."  You're like, "Okay, well, says on here that you actually stopped breathing three times per  hour. Use the dog analogy, use some other analogy." They're gonna be like, "Oh, well,  that's a really good point." And that could be a great case for oral appliance therapy be -  cause CPAP's not gonna be covered. No medical treatments can be covered for their  normal sleep apnea.   With an AHI of three, they're not gonna be put on Ozempic or some  drug for sleep apnea if according to insurance rules, they don't have sleep apnea. So that  is so-called normal, less than five. Mild, 5 to 15, moderate, 15 to 30, and then severe over  30. A lot of insurance companies, including Medicare, if the sleep apnea is mild, 5 to 15,  they require the patient to have something else wrong. For example, a mood disorder, they  have to have an upward sleepiness scale score of 11 or higher, hypertension, things like  that. If they have only mild sleep apnea by itself, then that won't be covered by their insur -  ance either.  Oxygen Saturation   [0:04:25]  Oxygen saturation should be above 90%. If you are at sea level, it's going to be higher. If  you are higher in the mountains, it's going to be lower. With sleep apnea, people's O2  SATs will drop as they stop breathing or as they have their hypopneas. So a so-called mild  problem is considered 85 to 90, a moderate problem is 80 to 84, severe problem is below  80. Why this is important as you talk to your patients is they may have had an experience  where they've been in a hospital and they had a pulse oximeter on their finger and alarms  would go off. And you could even ask them, say, "Have you ever had that experience?  You're in a hospital, they had a thing on your finger, things would start alarming and stuff  like that."   They'd be like, "Yeah, I do remember something like that." If they have any kind  of medical background at all, if they're a nurse or something like that, you could say, "Do  you know when that's set to alarm?" And a nurse would know this. They'd be like, "Well,  yeah, if it drops below 90. Exactly." So you spend X time below 90.  [0:05:30]  If you were in a hospital, 20% of the night, an alarm would have been going off. That's a  good way to explain to people this. The other thing that you can do personally and that you  could even have your patients do, it could be fun if you had time for them to do this, is you  put the pulse oximeter on your finger, hold your breath as long as you can, and notice that  it doesn't really go down much or at all. It goes down after you start breathing again 'cause  there's a lag there. But again, just to show that's like, yeah, if I just hold my breath for 10  09/01/25   Page   of 2   11

SSC 2.0 - 217: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 2  seconds and start breathing again, it's not gonna really do anything. So the person that  has desaturations, there's longer stuff going on. Other things are going on there that are  causing the desaturation. If you just simply held your breath, stopped breathing for 11, 12  seconds, and that was it, and you didn't do that over and over and over again, you proba -  bly wouldn't desat if you were healthy anyway.  [0:06:37]  Okay. So mild, just into the 80s, moderate, low 80s, severe, lower than 80. I challenge you  to try to get a pulse oximeter to go below 80. Good luck with that. You're not gonna be able  to do it, yet you're gonna see patients that do do this. This is something to point out to  them that that is completely not cool.  Sleep Stages Review   [0:07:00]  Okay, sleep stages, we'll go through this pretty quick. So we've done this on other videos,  but we have our relaxed wakefulness. We have our stage one, stage two, stage three and  four have been combined into three. And then we have REM sleep. So you have your N1,  two, and three, non-REM, and then REM sleep. And then, of course, we have awake. So if  the sleep study has brainwaves or a surrogate of brainwaves, like the peripheral arterial  tone, then we're going to have sleep staging. And even stuff like your Garmin watch, your  Apple watch, stuff like that, are getting that through. And I don't know if this will show up on  the camera. Let's see if it does. So if you see a green flashy light thingy there, that is  what's going on with my watch or with an Apple   watch is the flashy lights there.  [0:07:51]  Let's see. Yeah, I think I can make that flashy light. So the green flashy lights are what is  measuring through my skin. And it's giving, actually, my watch has a pulse oximeter on it  too, but it does heart rate variability. And every morning I get my sleep staging on my  Garmin watch. Jenny uses an Oura ring. She has an Apple watch, but she doesn't have an  Apple watch that she wears to sleep. So it's getting that. And so a lot of home sleep tests  are doing that too. Like last night, my score was 83. And you kind of see the histogram, the  sleep histogram there that is showing light sleep and deep sleep and REM sleep and all  that stuff on the sleep histogram, all gotten from just the flashy light there going through  my skin.  N1 & N2 Sleep   [0:08:51]  So light sleep, four to 5% of your total sleep time gets more as we get older. And that's be -  cause we lose deep and REM sleep. Stage two sleep is restful sleep. Now, I've got on  here, think junk food sleep. And that's not a bad analogy. There's a lot of good stuff that  09/01/25   Page   of 3   11

SSC 2.0 - 217: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 2  happens during stage two sleep. But the reason I use kind of the junk food sleep analogy  is to compare that with nutritious sleep from stage three.  N3 Sleep   [0:09:21]  Deep sleep is where the things happen that most of us really care about. Now again, stage  two has some cool stuff, but stage three is where we're going to heal. It's where we're go -  ing to have growth occur in children and in adults. That's where repair happens for our tis -  sues. So if you just kind of as an easy way to remember this, if deep sleep is reduced, the  patient will tend to be physically tired and/or hurt. Whereas with REM sleep, if the REM  sleep is reduced, they will tend to be mentally fatigued or tired. Decreases with age, above  40 to 50% in kids can be totally gone, in adults over 40. And this is something that a lot of  people are striving to make better. If you watch any videos, podcasts type things or what -  ever on health. I mean, good luck watching something that doesn't talk about sleep. And  when they're talking about good sleep, they're sometimes explicitly talking about deep  sleep. Sometimes they're just talking about getting a good sleep and not going into the de -  tails of what that means.  [0:10:42]  But sleep is really, really important as we know, but it's in anything that I look at from an  athletic standpoint or longevity or weightlifting or recovery or running, any stuff that I look  at, they're gonna talk about sleep as being critical. And in some cases, it's like, yeah, and if  you don't get good sleep, don't worry about the rest of the stuff 'cause none of it's gonna  matter. You could have a great diet, you could be exercising well, but if you don't have  good sleep, you're not going to get the benefits of that.  REM Sleep   [0:11:23]  REM sleep, of course, our rapid eye movement sleep, this is 20-25% of total sleep time.  Body is basically paralyzed, this is where our mind is actively doing problem solving and all  that sort of stuff. So once again, if deep sleep is reduced or gone, they tend to feel physi -  cally tired, they're not going to repair like they should. If REM sleep is reduced or gone,  then mentally they're going to suffer. We go through these different sleep cycles through -  out the night, like that histogram I showed you on my watch.  What to Look for on a Sleep Study Report?   [0:11:56]  Alright, so what should we look for on a sleep study report? Let's go through this line by  line here, bullet point by bullet point. First is TST, or total sleep time, and sleep efficiency.  09/01/25   Page   of 4   11

SSC 2.0 - 217: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 2  So sleep efficiency is how much of the total time in bed were you actually asleep. That's  our sleep efficiency versus our total sleep time.  [0:12:19]  Then we'll have our sleep stages. Normal ranges, N1 is about 5%, N2 is about 50%, N3,  which used to be known as 3 and 4, 10-20%, and REM is 20-25%. Just kind of remember  those basics of what is normal ranges for that. Ventilation summary, we're gonna have ob -  structive apneas, we'll have central apneas, which is, remember that's where the brain for -  gets to tell you to breathe, so that's not an obstructive event, that's just you not trying to  breathe, it's a central apnea.  [0:12:55]  Obstructive hypopneas, apnea popnia index, and your respiratory disturbance index.  These all won't be on every sleep study, but these are all the things that could be on a  sleep study report. We'll then typically have positional and REM data. So we'll have ap -  neas and hypopneas, AHI, sometimes RDI, in supine lateral REM, and supine REM. And  again, this is more on your full PSGs, but there are some home sleep tests that will do this  as well. Sometimes it's a little bit more of a guess.  [0:13:34]  I mean, if you have a device that's only on your wrist, for example, how does it know my  sleep posture? It can make some guesses, make some educated guesses there, but it  won't be as good as if I had something on my chest that is going to move when I'm on my  side, it clearly knows I'm on my side. When I'm on my back, when I'm on my stomach, it  clearly knows where I am. Whereas my arm could be in different places, and it really  wouldn't know if I'm on my side or where I am.  [0:14:09]  Now, why, who cares? That's because, as you know, sleep apnea can be worse on your  back. And this is a really big one that we will come to as we go over the different reports. A  lot of your patients are going to have positional sleep apnea. They're gonna be way worse  on their back than on their side. And that should really be something that you think about  quite a bit 'cause sometimes we want to make things more complicated. Sometimes we  want to make things less complicated.  [0:14:51]  But, for example, let me throw one of my kind of pet peeves out there a little bit. Palate ex -  pansion. So, you've got a patient and we're gonna be like, okay, well, we're going to ex -  pand their palate orthodontically, maybe with surgery, and they're 50 years old. And we're  gonna do that 'cause it's gonna help them with nasal breathing and stuff like that. But you  look at their sleep study and their AHI is four on their side and 27 on their back. Is that be -  cause their maxilla is more expanded when they're on their side? Well, clearly not. So, is it  really about their nasal breathing? Is it really about the maxilla in that scenario? Or could it  be about the base of the tongue that's falling back when they're on their back? Now, you  could argue it's like, well, maybe they're on their back and that's causing some nasal ob -  struction, some congestion in their nose. Okay, I'll buy that. But just my point is, look for  things like that on the sleep study.  09/01/25   Page   of 5   11

SSC 2.0 - 217: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 2  [0:16:06]  The data is right there. The data should help you understand where is the obstruction com -  ing from. If you have somebody that is equal on their side and on their back as far as their  apnea is concerned, well, okay, maybe that's not as much base of the tongue. Whereas if  it's in REM-supine sleep, that is their entire problem. And if they are not in REM-supine  sleep, they really don't have a problem. Then those are people that it might be all about  the jaw. It might be about the jaw falling backwards. Okay, so this is the reason I'm kind of  using a motif there at the beginning of the Sherlock Holmes character. The investigator is  it's up to you to be looking for these clues that are going through this. This can help you  with your treatment of the patient, can help you understand why they may or may not do  well with oral appliance therapy, those who will likely do well with oral appliance therapy.  And also if you're thinking about some of these more invasive procedures, having a pretty  good idea in advance if that's gonna help them or not.  [0:17:20]  All right, so back to our list here. Oxygenation, we're gonna have their lowest saturation,  the nadir, and we're gonna have the time below 90. We'll have heart rate, limb movement,  and then the sleep doctor's impression and recommendations. Remember, just like you  when you went through x-rays and stuff in dental school or whatever, we give our impres -  sion. It's not a diagnosis per se. It's here's our impressions, here's our problems list, here's  our suggestions,   same thing.  Sleep Review   [0:17:57]  All right, now a little history here is this move from PSG to home sleep testing. So I went  back and I found something that's really well done. It's from sleep review back in 2013,  and this is around the time that all of this stuff was happening. So about 2000, so late  2007, 2008, 2009, 2010 ish right around there, becoming more and more prominent. And  the question, so when I started in the field, it was all PSG all the time. And I remember  when home sleep testing started to become more common and the sleep doctors univer -  sally were not excited about it. Like none of them, all of them were like, this is terrible be -  cause they're used to all of these leads.  [0:18:55]  Yeah, and they're used to all of this information, all this good data. And all of a sudden the  home sleep test didn't have that. And they're like, "Yeah, this is garbage." And I remember  talking to the sleep doctors that we worked with. And I remember a primary care doctor in  Boise who got really into the home sleep testing and she felt that this was much better for  patients and it was more convenient for them and it would cost less and it was going to  help more of her patients because it took longer to get in the sleep lab and it was more  expensive and blah, blah, blah. And she actually, she and her husband actually started a  home sleep testing company. And after a little while it is kind of funny, she got so into  09/01/25   Page   of 6   11

SSC 2.0 - 217: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 2  sleep, she's a primary care doctor, that she actually at that point, you were able to get your  boards in sleep regardless of your background or whatever. Even PhDs back then could  get their boards in sleep. And she decided to go get her boards in sleep and she became a  sleep doctor. And she still works in our community as a sleep doctor. And still was an ad -  vocate for HSTs but understood the why we would want a full   PSG.  [0:20:14]  So, initially they weren't for it at all. They were pretty kicking against it. And then ultimately  what happened is Medicare was like, "Well, prove it to us, AASM, that a home sleep test  isn't good enough." And they couldn't. So therefore Medicare was like, "Well, this is gonna  save a lot of money if we don't have to have people going to the sleep lab all the time. And  so they said, you know what? Home sleep test works. We're good with it. And as soon as  they did that, then every insurance company was like, okay, yeah, us too then. And then  some have taken it to the level of you really can't get a PSG unless you've done an HST  and it's inconclusive. And then there's other states and insurance companies where they  do allow PSGs. Like I said, we're fortunate in Idaho that a lot of our patients still get full  PSGs. And we'll talk about titrating oral appliances with PSGs as well. All right. So anyway,  so just a little bit of data on this. These are the references that he uses in this 2013 article.  I'll read some of the titles here.  [0:21:22]  Continuous positive air pressure, titration for obstructive sleep apnea automatic versus  manual titration. So that is using the auto set CPAP machines. Working group evaluation  of auto CPAP devices and home treatment, sleep apnea, hypopnea syndrome. So another  one on using auto set CPAP in combination with home sleep testing. The third one there  from 2011, non-inferiority of functional outcome in ambulatory management of obstructive  sleep apnea, that is showing that home sleep tests were non-inferior. That's the research  term for as good as. As the name implies, you are showing that it's not worse than. So  there's been non-inferiority studies done with oral appliance therapy compared to CPAP,  for example. I won't read all of these, but this is the data that they're looking at here of,  hey, at this point, there's been studies for multiple years that have shown that auto-set  CPAP's okay, that home sleep testing is okay, that it's not worse than these other things.  Conclusion   [0:22:33]  So then he goes in and he concludes with all of this data, these studies suggest that home  sleep testing is as good as the traditional PSG pathway, and CPAP adherence may actual -  ly be better with the home pathway. However, a few questions remain. Here are these  questions. I think this is, again, now, Mark here, 2013 is when this was written. The study's  primarily focused on moderate to severe OSA, and the relevancy of the findings to mild  OSA is uncertain. In both of the comparative effectiveness studies, in-lab PSG was per -  formed on all patients with an AHI less than 15 to limit unrecognized moderate to severe  09/01/25   Page   of 7   11

SSC 2.0 - 217: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 2  OSA, but is this really necessary? Considering the night-to-night variability inherent with  OSA, maybe the argument should not be portable monitoring versus PSG, but rather  whether multinight portable monitoring should be recommended to increase the sensitivity  of identifying moderate OSA. Okay, said a different way. Okay, the first phrase there before  the comment, the study's primarily focused on moderate to severe OSA. So with your pa -  tients as a dentist, are your patients gonna skew moderate to severe or mild to moderate?  Okay, most dentist patients will skew towards mild. We tend to see younger, healthier peo -  ple and tend to refer more women than our medical colleagues would 'cause you're gonna  pick up on the TMJ problems, the bruxism, the things like that in women. That in a thin,  younger woman, and you're gonna ask questions like, do you snore?  [0:24:11]  Has your bed partner ever said you stopped breathing? Whereas that woman's physician  is never gonna ask questions like that because they're not a fat old man. All right, so the  point here is home sleep testing is not really designed to pick up mild sleep apnea. It's  more about the moderate to severe. And so this is a potential positive. One way you're  looking at it is they're saying, "Well, if we do this,   the home sleep test should be good at  picking up moderate to severe." Okay, that makes sense. But on the flip side of that coin is  it may not be as sensitive to picking up milds. So this author is saying, well, maybe, and  he's actually saying it for the moderate to severes, but maybe we do multiple nights so that  we make it more sensitive. If we get multiple nights at home, maybe this is more sensitive,  but still you gotta think about that mild cases being missed.  [0:25:21]  Okay, number two, what is the true cost effectiveness of home sleep testing? The home  PAP study showed a lower cost with home testing while the Pietszch model suggests that  PSG may be more cost effective despite higher upfront costs by limiting extended health  risk and associated healthcare utilization assuming superior diagnostic accuracy. Said an -  other way, maybe PSG is better because we're picking up stuff that we can't on a home  sleep test.  [0:25:50]  Number three, finally, home sleep testing versus PSG needs to be further evaluated taking  into account the delivery of care model. Effectiveness of portable monitoring used within  primary care clinic models needs to be considered, especially in remote areas without ac -  cess to tertiary care. In an excellent commentary by Dr. Ayas where he challenged the ac -  curacy of several of Pietzsch's assumptions, sorry, I don't know how to pronounce that  otherwise, his final statement seems to be an appropriate conclusion. The fundamental  issue is not whether ambulatory studies are better or worse than PSG, but rather under  what conditions use of home studies is appropriate. Agreed. Okay, I totally agree with that  and you should too. Now nowadays depending on where you live, you may not have a  choice between a home sleep test and a PSG because the patient's insurance is making  that choice for them, which sucks.  09/01/25   Page   of 8   11

SSC 2.0 - 217: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 2  My Conclusions 10+ Years Later   [0:26:41]  So my conclusion more than 10 years after that article was written, HST is not as good for  diagnosis of patients who are less likely to have moderate to severe OSA. It just isn't. HST  does not rule out OSA, only in, unless it's compared to another HST with the same   equip -  ment and the less obvious the disease, the more sensitive the diagnostic test needs to be.  [0:27:10]  HST is quite good, but it's not as sensitive as PSG. As such, do I prefer my patients getting  PSGs? Yeah, I do. Why? Because it's more sensitive. Because it gives us better informa -  tion on their sleep stages and maybe even because it's more involved. You   saw the video  of Jared going through that. It's a lot. Now, yeah, there will be some of your patients are  like, "I don't really know that I buy that because that was super weird and everything else."  But here's the argument on that too, by the way, if you've never heard this before. People  will say, "Well, I don't feel I slept well in the sleep lab. I had all the wires. I had the crazy  stuff. I know the dude's watching me from the other room. Like that's all weird." And you  say, "Well, right, but you did sleep." So that's the cool thing about a PSG is we know exact -  ly how long they slept. We don't know approximately how long. We know to the second  how long they were asleep.  [0:28:21]  And you can say, "Yeah,   you didn't sleep well in the sleep lab, but you were able to sleep  five hours." And the theory is, is that you're worse at home. You're worse in your normal  environment. You're worse if you have a nightcap and you didn't there in the sleep lab.  That's the theory is that being in your own comfortable environment does not make your  sleep apnea better. And most patients will be like, "Okay, that makes a lot of sense." Okay.  Now, again, don't get me wrong on this. Is home sleep testing okay? Yeah, it is. Can home  sleep testing help us to move the needle on getting more people diagnosed? You bet it  can. I'm actually an investor in a company that is taking this technology to try to have far  more people screened and tested for sleep apnea. I'm a big believer in that. Nevertheless,  my son Jared had an in-lab study. Okay. A family member is gonna get an in-lab study be -  cause I want the best information available for my loved ones. And I like to treat my pa -  tients the same ways I treat my family.  [0:29:44]  So I really want the best information for them too. However, having said that, not my call,  and not your call either, typically. Now, right now, it might be your call because you are  working with a company and that's what they do. Okay. They don't have an opportunity to  do PSGs. But if you connect with local sleep doctors, and you use the model that I advo -  cate, which is you refer to a doctor who then decides on the next steps, then you may see  more PSGs because the sleep doctor may decide, you know,   in this case, yeah, PSG, 22  year old woman that's thin. I think I need full stuff here. In Salt Lake, we have a sleep doc -  tor that we work with and she's a neurologist by training and then went into sleep medicine  out of neurology. She doesn't like home sleep tests because she doesn't feel that there are  09/01/25   Page   of 9   11

SSC 2.0 - 217: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 2  home sleep tests that provide the EEG data that she wants. So she really wants those  brain waves. She's a neurologist, makes sense. So she advocates for almost all of her pa -  tients to get PSGs. Okay. So be aware of how all of this works.  [0:30:53]  The battle has already been fought though. Home sleep tests are going nowhere. They are  getting better over time. They are not as sensitive as PSGs and never will be because  there's just limited data that you can get from a fingertip probe. But there's a lot. And again,  I'm an advocate for people using things like this, like my Garmin watch here. And I'm test -  ing it every night. And Jenny's using her Oura ring and it's every night. And so we have  good data. We're able to see that night to night variability. We're able to see how does a  workout affect things? How does a travel day affect things? How does using our red light  therapy change our sleep? Okay. A lot of Spencer Study Club members have really gotten  into that and noticed that their sleep is much better on the days that they use their red  light. How's the timing of that affect things? Okay. All of this stuff, really, really important.  Reviewing the Data (is AHI telling the Whole Story?)   [0:31:50]  All right. As we review the data, are we comparing apples to oranges? Are we comparing  apples to apples? What's going on? So remember, try to compare PSG to PSG, HST  to   HST.   Compare the oral appliance titration study to the baseline study. Was there a  change in AHI? Was there a change in apneas? Postural data, did the patient sleep more  on their back with the oral appliance? Okay. If they slept more on their back with the oral  appliance, then maybe that would affect the AHI. REM and supine REM. More REM with  the oral appliance? More supine REM with the oral appliance? If they have more REM,  could that impact their AHI? Yeah. If they are more supine REM with the oral appliance,  could that impact their AHI? Yes. O2 saturations, sleep efficiency and sleep stages,  changes since the last study, weight gain, old baseline study. Okay.   This is another one of  those slides that you might want to take a screen capture of, print it out, have it ready to  go. But we also have our little sheets that you can go through that help you with this. But  these are the things you're looking for on sleep studies to help you get to the bottom of  what's going on.  [0:33:11]  And let me give you the classic scenario here. And we're about to go over a whole bunch  of sleep studies to really pound this in and make sure that you're very comfortable with  this. But it's not terribly uncommon for the AHI to not change that much with oral appliance  therapy. And that's because of things on this page right here. So if the person in their  baseline study was on their side and now they're on their back with their oral appliance  'cause they can sleep on their back now that they have an oral appliance. If in their base -  line study they didn't get a lot of REM sleep because they were having so many apneas  and now with the oral appliance they're getting more REM sleep, that can impact AHI. So  09/01/25   Page   of 10   11

SSC 2.0 - 217: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 2  in other words, the AHI was lower than it should have been on the baseline study because  they weren't on their back. They didn't have as much REM sleep. They didn't have supine  REM sleep. They didn't sleep well. When you have someone with an oral appliance and  they sleep better, they have REM sleep, they are able to go onto their back now where  they weren't able to before, they could still have some apneas. So sometimes when you're  comparing these things, the apnea or the AHI might go from 25 to 20 or something like  that, which looks awful.  [0:34:37]  It's like, geez, this thing didn't help at all. That's because you're not looking at the data and  understanding that it's like actually it's helping a lot. Now, you may have been through this  before with patients and this may have been confusing for you because in that same sce -  nario where the AHI doesn't go down much, I'll bet you that the patient felt a lot better. And  that is super duper duper common that the patient's like, "Wow, I feel like a million bucks."  So, again, if you're newer to Spencer Study Club, you may not have done what I recom -  mend, which is you refer people back for   consideration of follow-up sleep study once  they're snoring less and feeling better. That's pretty much it. You may have done it based  on different things. Maybe you did your own pulse oximetry. Maybe you did your own HST,  but it wasn't the same equipment that the sleep lab used, whatever. But my point on the  feeling better, snoring less, is we know that they're feeling better. So subjectively, they're  feeling better and objectively, that snoring is less. So theoretically, their apneas are going  to be quite a bit less.  [0:35:53]  Okay. So, we've never had a patient with a not dramatic reduction of AHI who didn't feel  better. Okay, let me say that another way. That's a little confusing. So we've never had a  patient who had a not very good reduction, so their AHI was not dropped to below 10 or  below 5 who didn't also feel better. Okay, so sometimes we have people that have a quite  significant reduction of AHI and they don't feel that much better. So kind of the opposite of  that. Sometimes we send people back 'cause it's like, "Well, how's the snoring?" "Well,  snoring is a lot better." "How are you feeling?" "I still don't feel that good."   And we'll send  them back to the doctor for a follow-up sleep study to be like, okay, what's going on? And  then sometimes those patients come back and it's like, yeah, AHI is resolved.   They don't  have sleep apnea anymore, but they still feel bad. And then that's when we talk about all  the other things that's in level five of other things that could be making them tired and  where I really lean on the sleep doctors to be like, okay, this person's airway is protected.  We did our job, you do your job. You figure out why they're still tired.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 11   11

