SSC 2.0 - 206: Fitting the Morning Reprogrammer  SSC 2.0   Level 2  206: Fitting the Morning Reprogrammer  [intro music]  Fitting a “Morning Reprogrammer”   [0:00:12]  Then typically at the same time, we're going to do what I call morning reprogrammer. Now  you could do the morning reprogrammer before this, okay? And there are some people  that have moved to making the morning reprogrammer at the records appointment, and I  actually love that idea. So making it at the records appointment, if you have time, right? So  you kind of have to work this in, but you could make it at the records appointment and then  you tell the patient, hey, what this does is it brings your jaw back to your normal bite. And  you teach them, this is your normal bite, tap, tap, tap. And in a second, we're going to talk  about Shimstock and stuff like that. So you would teach them about their occlusion and  then you make them the morning reprogrammer, explain what it does, and then teach  them how to use it and say, hey, it's going to take a week or so or two weeks or three  weeks or whatever to get your appliance back.  [0:01:10]  I want you using this between now and then so that when you come back to get the oral  appliance, I'll ask, you know, are you aware of how your bite feels? And have you used the  morning reprogrammer to get your bite back in the morning? And do you have any ques -  tions on that? I think that's a better way to do it because doing it when you fit the appliance  is kind of overwhelming. They've never experienced anything like this before. There's a  thousand moving parts. You're telling them all sorts of stuff about forwards and backwards,  and you're asking a bunch of questions that they don't know. And now you're going to  throw in on top of this, by the way, you got to use this thing or it's going to your bite's going  to change and that's going to wreak all sorts of havoc. So consider that. And even if you're  a tried and true professional, consider doing this at the records. I think for most people, it's  a good idea. There are my offices. They've kind of got their groove and this is how they do  things. So they've not implemented this in the same way. But a lot of the people in  Spencer Study Club have play around with it, see what works best for you, okay?  [0:02:22]  The goal of the morning reprogrammer is to get them back to their original program of their  occlusion. So this is getting us back to our habitual occlusion is what the morning repro -  grammer is all about. Now, as of recording this, this is still the best way to do it. There's no  better way on the market yet. We are experimenting with printing. There's been other  companies make milled and they'll call these by different names, right? AM aligner, stuff  like that. Morning occlusal guide is another term. They're not as good. There's something  09/01/25   Page   of 1   10

SSC 2.0 - 206: Fitting the Morning Reprogrammer  about what depends on the patient's bite, obviously. So the big deal there is if they have a  tight anterior occlusion, so when I bite down like that, my front teeth touch. If your front  teeth touch, then it's very likely that a milled or printed device will not allow you to fully get  your back teeth together. You'll be close, but it won't be all the way. So my paradigm is I  want the teeth to touch so that we are reinstalling that proprioception, that muscular pro -  prioception of the occlusion. Now, most of your patients have no clue about their bite, have  never thought about it.  [0:03:56]  They have no idea. This is one of the reasons that people lose their bite because they  come forward. And remember, when you see patients on a daily basis and say, bite down  for me, how often do they bite on their front teeth? And then you say, no, no, no, bite on  your back teeth, bite on the big ones in the back. And you have to kind of guide them  through it, right? And this is like a 40, 50, 60 year old person. They've been having these  teeth for quite some time, but they don't even understand what you're talking about. When  you say to bite down, they just bite down. Here we go. The fact that they do that should  help you understand why people can lose their occlusion. Because for you, it's be like,  yeah, that's so weird. How would someone not notice that their back teeth don't touch  anymore? Well, because they never noticed their back teeth touching in the first place. So  you want to make them aware of it. Now, be careful though, because we're not talking  about creating a occlusal neurotic here that just goes through their entire day thinking  about their occlusion. That is not our goal whatsoever. But the goal is that they know what  it should feel like. Okay, so they know when they check their bite at night, okay?  [0:05:10]  Remember, it's floss like a boss, check your bite every night. When they check their bite  every night, they know what that feels like. The morning reprogrammer takes them to that  spot. And again, as I record this, there is no better way to do this than what I'm about to  describe. I hope that we get a better way, because the bummer with this is, as you're going  to see in a second, is it looks like chewing gum. And so this is the world's easiest thing to  throw in the trash. So that's a bummer. So I do want us to come up. And there is a cool  thing right now, and this is just barely on the market. And I'll remember to put a picture of it  in here. But it's EMA, with their new 3D printed appliance, has a little thing called a pull  tool. And that's to help get the super thin appliances out. These things are there for align -  ers. You may have heard of a pull tool for aligners. So they were smart enough to put a  pull tool with a little bit of thermoplastic in the front that you then heat up and do exactly  what I'm about to show you here.  [0:06:25]  That's really smart. So I love that, because it's this tool that's blue, and then this white  morning reprogrammer. And it's going to be a heck of a lot harder for a patient to throw  that in the trash versus what I'm about to show you. So that could be the very best way to  do this. And you could probably buy these things just to have, regardless of the appliance  that you use. I think it's such a good idea that I wouldn't be surprised if other manufactur -  ers kind of copy it and figure out their own way to do that. But the principle behind the EMA  09/01/25   Page   of 2   10

SSC 2.0 - 206: Fitting the Morning Reprogrammer  pull tool morning reprogrammer and this morning reprogrammer are the same. So how  we're doing this as of today in our practice is this ThermAcryl-Plus. And so we've got some  ThermAcryl-Plus here. We have a tongue depressor. And then we got some Shimstock.  And what we do is we pour boiling hot water in there. You rustle up the beads onto that  tongue depressor. You're not like mixing it, like you're mixing a cake batter or something.  You're just kind of grabbing all the beads. And then as they get hot, they coalesce into  some silly putty looking material here.  [0:07:37]  Now with the Shimstock, we want to make sure that the patient has posterior occlusion.  Critical bit of material here is do they have posterior occlusion? And remember talking  about the examination? This should be, in my opinion, part of your examination. So if you  did this part of your examination, awesome. But I'd do it again because we're going to  check. And you might note like, hey, yeah, in my exam, it said that he didn't have contact  between the first molars on the right side. Okay, still? Yep. Okay, it's still the same. Check.  We want to make sure that the person has posterior occlusion. If they do not have, if they  can't hold Shimstock, write that down. Because if you didn't write that down and then later  some other dentist or even you are like, oh, yeah, their occlusion has changed here. Well,  has it changed? Or did we not write it down in the first place? Okay, remember, the pa -  tient's not going to be able to tell you, yeah, I'm a little light. I don't think I hold Shimstock  between my premolars on the left side. They're not going to tell you stuff like that. So this  is up to you to know.  [0:08:43]  And then that way down the road, you'll know if it's changed or not. If you don't do this  step, you won't know if it's changed. No one else will know if it's changed. And you're not  going to be able to go back to the models and see either. Okay, so you need to do this in  the mouth. So we check with Shimstock. Then we get our thermoplastic there and we  make it look like a Jolly Rancher. Stick it on the lower teeth. And then the really important  part here is we have them close down. They push with their tongue a little bit. And you do  not push with your finger to get that up onto the facials of the upper teeth. So do not do  that. Because ultimately what we want to do is we want to have some little grooves here,  some indentations. And we want to be able to see and have the patient be able to see  easily that their front teeth go into those indentations. Super duper duper duper critical.  [0:09:32]  Okay, one of the reasons it's critical is we're going to show the patient also that what it  means to be seated. I know that's a term that you know as a dentist or as a dental profes -  sional. Your patient won't know that. So what I do, and you may have had me do this with  you in a course, is I tell the patient, hey, just bring your jaw barely forward. So close down  into this and then just barely, as little as possible, bring your jaw forward. And they're like,  what do you notice? And what they'll notice is there will be a space between their teeth  and the morning reprogrammer. There will be a little gap. And I'll say, that's what you're  looking for. So at night, whenever you use this, you put that in, you're looking around,  should be no gaps. And then you should also be able to feel simultaneously, hey, my back  09/01/25   Page   of 3   10

SSC 2.0 - 206: Fitting the Morning Reprogrammer  teeth are touching. Okay, shimstock here with this in place. So here the morning repro -  grammer is all set. It's finished. And we check once again with shimstock. How come? Be -  cause the patient could have faked you out. So they could have bit forward just a little.  [0:10:38]  Okay, it's the front teeth, right? So it would not be terribly unusual for them to bite down  into that. And their front teeth are on. Like right now, as I do this for you, you can experi -  ment with this yourself. I can bite down on my front teeth fully solid. My back teeth aren't  touching at all. Right there, it's hard front teeth, back teeth, no contact. So you would think  that you've made this correct, and I'm wide open in the back. That's not going to reinforce  those muscle engrams. It's not going to reprogram me. What's the program? The program  is my normal occlusion. This is a reprogrammer. Appliances, all appliances are depro -  grammers. They're taking me away from that program, so I need a reprogrammer to take  me back to the program.  [0:11:33]  Okay, so that is that. All right, so now we've made that. We've got that. Now, again, strong -  ly consider, and I would say if you're kind of more of a beginner in the field, do the morning  reprogrammer at the records. I think that's a better way to do it. Again, it gives the person  something to think about while they're getting ready. It's like treatment started already.  Same time, you can be like, hey, download this SnoreLab app. I want you using this thing  every night, and we're going to get some baseline data on your snoring.  [0:12:02]  It's going to tell us how many decibels it is. We'll have some fun with that when you come  in and see who's got the loudest snoring of the month, right? Get that going. You're going  to start. Rather than let's just get records, see you back in three weeks, you're going to  kind of start your treatment right then. Get them to download the SnoreLab app, fit the  morning reprogrammer, teach them about their occlusion, teach them floss like a boss,  check your bite every night. Do all that stuff then. Work that into your schedule. I think  you're going to like that better rather than doing everything in the world at the fitting ap -  pointment and then people forgetting and like, oh, yeah, I forgot about that thing, and what  do I do again? I don't remember, all that kind of stuff.  At the End of the Appointment   [0:12:44]  Okay, at the end of the appointment, we make darn sure that that informed consent was  filled out and that they don't have any additional questions on that. Review with the patient.  So even though they filled out the informed consent, review with them that there could be  side effects, and I might even go so far as to saying there will be side effects, tooth move -  ment, bite changes, things like that, that there will be side effects if they don't do what you  said. Okay, and I think that's a better way to say it. Hey, the following things will occur. Your  bite will change, shift forward, your teeth can move, and that will happen if you don't keep  09/01/25   Page   of 4   10

SSC 2.0 - 206: Fitting the Morning Reprogrammer  your follow-ups and don't use this morning reprogrammer that we showed you last time or  this time, and don't floss like a boss, don't check your bite every night. If you don't do those  things, these will happen. Is that completely true? No. So I'm an example of that, but also I  kind of teach this for a living, so I do check my bite on the routine because I've tapped my  teeth together about 50 times just during this video. So if my bite was off from wearing my  oral appliance, I'd probably pick up on it, okay?  [0:13:57]  Because I kind of do this for a living. I think I would notice, but I don't use a morning repro -  grammer, never have, don't need to. My bite comes back together very quickly. My wife,  on the other hand, she did have a bite change, okay? And then even after a full mouth re -  construction to change her smile, she had another bite change, and she has to use her  morning reprogrammer to get her bite back after she uses her oral appliance. And again,  she's dang near, I would say she's 98% as knowledgeable about this as I am and lives in  this world. It's always funny whenever I go someplace and lecture, if I ask a question, I can  always see that Jenny has a hard time not answering the question. I was even at some -  thing recently, and I said something, and my son Jack was there, and the dentists that  were all very experienced in the room were just sitting there, and finally Jack answered the  question. I'm like, thank you, Jack. Where was it that you went to dental school again? Oh,  that's right, you haven't, okay. What's your people's problem, right? So no, it probably not  going to have side effects, but I would still say it that way. I think it's better, and you may  disagree with this, and that's okay. I think it's better to be, especially at this stage of the  game, we've already given the appliance, right?  [0:15:26]  They're probably not going to get up and leave and stick you with the bill and stuff. I think  it's better to be like, hey, stuff can happen here, but as long as you keep your follow-up  appointments, as long as you do these things we said, they're not going to, okay? That's  what we offer people, versus if they want to just do this on their own, they just get one on -  line. They don't need us, and the people who do get it online are going to have all these  problems because of all the reasons that I've said. Okay, they don't know where their bite  is in the first place. They're not going to know to check their bite. Yeah, the company that  gives them an appliance is going to have in there to check your bite and all this stuff, but  they're going to be clueless of how to do that. They're going to think they're checking their  bite by biting their front teeth together, and they're going to have problems. So explain this  to your patient. Make sure that they really get this before you kind of let them go.  Explain Again   [0:16:18]  Explain, again, you want to use that morning repositioner, morning reprogrammer, whatev -  er you choose to call it, at least weekly to make sure that their teeth and jaw position is still  in the same spot. As mentioned, I don't have to use it ever. In my experience, that is more  09/01/25   Page   of 5   10

SSC 2.0 - 206: Fitting the Morning Reprogrammer  the rule than the exception to the rule. So most of your patients won't need their morning  reprogrammer. Some will. Some are like Jenny that have to use it every day. But you treat  everyone as if they're going to need it every day, and then as they come back for follow-  ups, then they will say, oh yeah, my bite goes back together. And you'd be like, Kate, you  sure? Check. Show me. And they're like, okay, cool. And you feel that your bite's good?  Yes. And you check with shimstock, and this is a person that knows.  [0:17:04]  That person, you still actually want them to pop in that morning reprogrammer at least  once a week and teach them. It's like, hey, if it's not seating, then things have changed.  And the cool thing about that morning reprogrammer is if it fits on their lower teeth, it  means their lower teeth haven't changed. If their upper teeth go into the little grooves, that  means their upper teeth haven't changed. And if while it's on their lower teeth, the upper  teeth go into it, and they feel their back teeth touch, it means their bite hasn't changed  okay? Or if we want to be super technical here, it means all of it changed together.  [0:17:36]  Okay, I saw a thing recently. Someone was talking about aligners that are being made now  to kind of try to encourage anterior positioning of the jaw or stuff like that, of the mandible.  And this person said, well, he was commenting to a lab person and said, well, this is going  to be Newton's third law, which is every action has an opposite and equal reaction. So  every force is going to have an opposite and equal force. So if you have something on the  upper and then it's pulling or it has little fins or whatever that are doing that, there's going  to be a forward force on the lower jaw and a backwards force on the upper jaw. Now,  clearly that is true. However, it's not exactly pure Newtonian physics there because the  person isn't laying still on their back all night long with their jaw at the same force on those  tissues all night long. They roll over onto their side and it may be completely different. They  roll over on the other side and may be completely different. They may not be really pro -  truding very hard against that appliance. It may be on their stomach and it's completely dif -  ferent.  [0:18:53]  So bottom line is, yeah, is it possible that these things could be moving? Yes. But if you  think about it, theoretically, in that scenario of pulling back and pulling forward, you should  have the jaws, you know, the upper jaw kind of pull back and the lower jaw go forward and  eventually end up being edge to edge. And we don't ever see that happen. So again, could  be happening, but it seems to be more on a microscopic level. The upper jaw is the teeth  and the maxilla are all attached to the skull and that's a really good anchor. So even  though there are those equal and opposite forces, it's kind of like using TADs, using im -  plants to move things.  [0:19:34]  We know that yes, indeed, if you stick an implant in and then you were to pull another  tooth against that implant, that yes, those forces are equal and opposite, but one thing's  going to move a heck of a lot of easier than the other thing. So the implant's going to stay  put and it might move and it might move a fraction of a micron and then the tooth is going  09/01/25   Page   of 6   10

SSC 2.0 - 206: Fitting the Morning Reprogrammer  to move millimeters. That's probably what's going on with the jaws too, okay? So big, big  tangent there, but just kind of want to explain to you that if the person has that morning re -  programmer and it fits five years from now, nothing moved, okay? Or it all moved together  and nobody's going to care, okay?  Instruct the Patient and Set Up a Follow-Up   [0:20:14]  Make sure you give the patient the appliance instructions and again, I would encourage  you to have these be your instructions, not necessarily just the manufacturer's instructions.  Set up a fall appointment for three to four weeks out and explain that if they have any  problems at all that they should give you a call because the phrase I like to say is the last  thing we want to have happen is we get you back in here in a month and you say, oh, I  haven't been able to wear the appliance at all because of this comfort issue. Now, a few  things that are a little bit of update to this is in Spencer Study Club 1.0, so the original  Spencer Study Club, we were not using telemedicine. That was not a thing in 2018. And if  you would have told me back then that telemedicine would be a thing, I would have  thought, no, I can't imagine, you know, communicating to a patient over a computer or  telephone or whatever. And then COVID happened and we had to and now we can't prac -  tice without it for crying out loud. So you can do that and again, appliances are awesome.  [0:21:19]  And the new 3D printed ones and the milled ones and the nylon ones are pretty amazing  and don't require a lot of adjustments. So I mentioned to you a bit ago that I have multiple  appliances made. I never adjust them. Now, I got pretty straight teeth, my lower teeth get a  little crooked, but I've never taken a burr to these appliances. Just pop them in. And so for  me, would I need to go back to your office? No. So you could absolutely have a model  where you perhaps it may be two weeks out, maybe two or three days out, maybe there's  a phone call or a text, just a text. Hey, Jamison, how's it going with the appliance? Have  you been able to sleep through the night with it? Not quite yet, but I did get two or three  hours. Awesome. You know, remember it could take a couple weeks. Keep going. I'll check  back in via text in another week and a half. Great. So the only reason that person needs to  come back to your office is if they have a comfort issue. If they don't, then you could via  computer or whatever, hey, how's it going?  [0:22:26]  Tell me about your bite. You could go through all of this via telemedicine and then only  bring in the people that need to. The cool thing about the telemedicine is when you bring  people in, you know what it's for. Whereas when you bring people in just kind of automati -  cally for follow up, you're going to have a lot that it's just real quick. They're in and out and  it's almost like you and they are thinking, what did I come in for? And then you're going to  have some that are there forever because it's too loose and I've got to tighten the appli -  ance or they're having major problems and it's a big hullabaloo. And what happens? If you  09/01/25   Page   of 7   10

SSC 2.0 - 206: Fitting the Morning Reprogrammer  haven't had this experience yet, what happens if you get a patient that goes way longer  than scheduled and makes the rest of the schedule get behind? It is extremely common  for the front desk and the back sometimes to collaborate on that and be like, you know  what? 45 minutes isn't long enough for these follow-ups, so let's make them all an hour.  And next thing you know, you're wondering why team members are just standing around  and it's because they've made these follow-up appointments so long that no one ever uses  all that time now and you're just wasting time in your office.  [0:23:41]  I love the idea of having telemedicine for that contact, talking to the patient, figuring out  what needs to be done, and if they're like, oh my gosh, this is so loose, I just can't keep it  in. Okay, we're going to need to tighten it. Well, that might need 10 more minutes than your  typical follow-up, okay? Or if the patient's like, you know, I'm doing great, I am snoring a  little bit, and you're like, okay, well, we could send you the bands, we could do whatever.  You know, I'd feel more comfortable coming in and having you guys adjust it for me. Okay,  great. Then you know that that's going to be like legit five, 10 minutes is all to give them  the bands, put on the new band, turn the screw, whatever. You'll have people like that, that  they'll want you to do this. Literally, we've had sometimes people where they just, they  don't even come back. They just come up, yeah, everything is comfortable, everything's  cool, I just, I'm not comfortable adjusting it, I'd like you guys to do that. Great, they come  in, let them know at the front desk, hand the appliance, the assistant comes and gets it,  turns it a millimeter, goes back out to the waiting room, says pop this in really quick, does  that feel okay? Yeah, that feels okay. Bye. Okay? Bottom line, three to four weeks away,  and again, if you've been doing this a little bit, but you're new to Spencer Study Club, so  you haven't heard this before.  [0:24:57]  A lot of dentists, as they get initially into dental sleep medicine, and it could be because  this is taught by some people somewhere this way, but they'll get people back in like a  week, and then like two weeks later, and then like three weeks later, and they're just like  doing all these follow-ups for frankly no reason at all. And the patients really don't want to  come in, and it's a pain in the butt for most people to go into your office and stuff like that.  You don't need them to come in, that you can figure this stuff out over the phone or via  doxy MEs, what we use for our telemedicine, D-O-X-Y.M-E, that's what we use. There  might even be a Spencer Study Club discount for that, so check. That is so much better.  Okay, so doing it, when we first started doing this, and I mentioned this was kind of imme -  diately during and towards the end of COVID, I remember distinctly Kevin Mangelson runs  our Salt Lake practice, he's like, oh my gosh, what has happened to our schedule? Like  there's holes everywhere in our schedule. And then he realized, oh, that's because on  Mondays when I do my telemedicine follow-ups, I'm doing 40 follow-ups on Monday.  [0:26:15]  That's dang, that's 40 hours previously, not quite, but you know, if there was a 45 minute  appointment and 15 minutes to turn the room or whatever, 40 hours of would have been in  the schedule before that now aren't because he was doing all of that in telemedicine. And  09/01/25   Page   of 8   10

SSC 2.0 - 206: Fitting the Morning Reprogrammer  by the way, this has not changed that much because the time's so short that I'm about to  say. So even the typical telemedicine follow-up that Dr. Mangelson does is five to seven  minutes. That's it. And that's him being social and how's everything going and cool. And  then it's five to seven minutes total. So strongly consider incorporating telemedicine into  your practice and into your follow-up. Your patients are going to like it better. It's going to  make you far more efficient. When you bring people back into the office for any type of ad -  justment, you're going to know why you're bringing them in. That's going to make a really  big deal to you. It's going to make you far more profitable and everything's going to be  way, way, way, way better in your practice if you implement that in from the beginning. So if  you're a beginner, start off correctly. And if you've been doing this for a while, then even if  it's like, well, this is how we do it. I would strongly encourage you to consider this because  it's going to make your practice much, much, much, much better.  [0:27:34]  And by the way, it's better for the patient too. They're going to like it a lot better. I know you  think you're awesome, but nobody really likes coming in to see you. They would rather do  other stuff. They'd rather see their grandkids. They'd rather see their friend. They'd rather  go golfing. They'd rather get more done at work than come in and spend two hours of their  life getting to your office, figuring out parking, coming in, sitting in your waiting room for five  minutes, all that kind of stuff. The beauty too of the telemedicine stuff is nobody kind of  cares if you're running a little bit late because they're probably either at home or in their  office. And they're doing other stuff. And so they're just in the virtual waiting room. And  there's cool things you can do there too with the virtual waiting room. You can have videos.  You could have educational material, stuff like that. But bottom line, they're not anxious of  like, God, what's going on? And there can be a message from your staff like, hey, Dr.  Spencer's like running five minutes late. He'll be right with you. Yeah, no problem. It's su -  per duper cool. So consider putting that into your appointment regimen and making this  something that you either start doing or that you start right from the beginning and make  that part of your protocol.  Give the Patient your Cellphone Number   [0:28:41]  Okay, lastly, this is something that I like to do, and that is I give the patient my cell phone  number and tell them that they can call me with any questions. All the kind of, well, I was  about to say the best doctors that I've ever seen do this. And that's not to imply that you're  not a good doctor if you don't do this, but I think it's important. And I can like probably  count on a couple hands the number of patients who have called me or texted me when I  give them that. And my cell phone number has been on my business card like my entire  career. People don't tend to abuse that privilege, okay? So give it to them. And again, that  kind of reinforces, “hey, if you have any problems, I need to know about this”. This puts  you kind of in a position of strength too. If you have a patient that does come into the office  09/01/25   Page   of 9   10

SSC 2.0 - 206: Fitting the Morning Reprogrammer  for follow-up or even has the telemedicine and they're like, “yeah, this is really bothering  me. I'm not wearing it”. Well, why didn't you contact me? Okay, this is like three weeks that  you've had the appliance now.  [0:29:54]  “Oh, you know, yeah, I just didn't get around”. Hey, I gave you my cell phone number. I  gave it to you on purpose so that you could reach out if you had a problem. Okay, next  time, if you have a problem, you text me. That's a good position for you to be in. And  again, putting you into position that ever, if a referring doctor was like, oh yeah, my patient  said that it was really uncomfortable, he had a problem. Well, referring doctor, I gave him  my cell phone number. He had my cell phone number from the get-go. He could have  called me anytime. We do Zoom follow-ups. He missed a Zoom follow-up. So you're going  to be in a position of like, yeah, no, I don't accept that. Okay, and your referring provider,  referring doctors can be pretty impressed by that because they don't give out their phone  numbers. Okay, they have a calling service still. And that calling service can, message  service, whatever, can kind of get ahold of them maybe. And that's been this way for 30  years. And most MDs still do this or can't get ahold of them at all. The only people that give  out their personal numbers are concierge level doctors. So that kind of puts you at that  same level. And again, I've done this for years. You can consider doing this if you think that  people are going to take advantage of it. They really aren't. I would encourage you to do  that.  Last but Far from Least   [0:31:12]  Okay, and last but far from least, the appliances build out immediately upon fitting, not at  impression. So the vast majority, and this is again a US-based thing here, and working  with insurance, but the vast majority of insurers pay for the delivery of the appliance. I  don't love that, by the way, but that's just the way the rules are as of 2025, is they're paying  for delivery. And the patient will actually have a little form that you fill out or they fill out that  is proof of delivery. One of my colleagues takes a picture of the appliance to show that  they gave that herb style appliance or that whatever it is. So they take a picture of the ap -  pliance with that patient's record. So they just have that to like visually documentation of, I  gave that patient that appliance. That's if you have to use a PDAC approved appliance and  insurance thing, but just make sure this is all done. So typically it's not going to be done at  the impressions appointments can be done at the fitting. And hopefully you've had your  billing people all involved in all of this. So they know exactly what's going on and that it  gets billed out at the right time.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 10   10

