SSC 2.0 - 205: Fitting A Custom OA  SSC 2.0   Level 2  205: Fitting A Custom OA  [intro music]  Next Step - Fitting of the Oral Appliance   [0:00:12]  Our next step, getting the patient in and fitting the oral appliance. So we are going to talk  about a couple different appliances and I'll kind of talk about some of the differences in the  different mechanisms of action, but here are a few things that are appropriate for all differ -  ent oral appliances. So prior to the appointment, we need to check to make sure that we  got the actual appliance. I know that seems almost silly to say, but there's been lots of  times in our practice anyway, I don't know for you, if you've ever had a patient show up  and the crown isn't there or something like that, it can be a real problem. So some offices  actually won't even schedule the appointment until they've got the appliance back from the  laboratory. I don't know that I'd go that far because depending on how busy your schedule  is, that could really kind of push them out quite some time. But just make sure that that's  part of your protocol, that a day or two in advance that your assistant is going through  making sure that we have everything that we need. As part of that, some things to do.  Check that the Appliance Looks Nice - Look at the Models   [0:01:22]  Check that the appliance looks nice. It's what you're expecting. It's the appliance type. It's  the material that you were expecting. So is it all hard? Is it a hard soft? Is it nylon? You  know, does it, everything that you expect is that there. Look at the models on which the  appliance was made. Now note I put on here old school. So this will depend on how you're  doing this. And if you're doing more traditional methods and thermoforming, acrylic, things  like that, then this will be the case. Frankly though, again, as I rerecord this content and  record it in 2025, this has become a darn rare, this part here. And I'm going to spend a lit -  tle bit of time on this because if you are my age or older than me or a little bit younger than  me, but not like in your late 20s or 30s, this can be something that you need to wrap your  brain around because things have changed dramatically with how appliances and frankly,  all other things in dentistry are made nowadays.  [0:02:42]  So your models, even in our office, so we make multiple appliances in-house, but we print  the models. So this part of check the models won't apply as much because the printed  models are far less likely to break. So think of this almost more historically, that what we  09/01/25   Page   of 1   19

SSC 2.0 - 205: Fitting A Custom OA  would do is the appliances would be made on stone models. And then you would look at  the models. And as I've put here on the slide, are there broken teeth? And where are the  broken teeth? Are they broken? Are all the front teeth broken off? And that would give you  a clue of, you know what, that's probably going to be a little bit tight right there. Now, the  person making the appliance would have blocked out the undercuts, things like that, but  you would still have teeth break. And that would give you a little bit of an idea. Hey, when I  put this in, it might be a little bit tight there. On the models, does the appliance seem tight  or loose?  [0:03:44]  So again, nowadays with printed models, the odds of you breaking a model, that'd be pret -  ty big deal if you're going to break the model. That's extremely unlikely that's going to hap -  pen. The tight or loose, that still would happen. However, we have to think about this too.  So as I just mentioned, in our practice, if we're making an EMA in-house, for example, we  would thermoform the appliance over the printed model. So there, the model and the ap -  pliance are directly correlated with each other. So we could check on the model to see is  this going to be likely to be tight or loose in the mouth?  Could Some Bulk be Reduced?   [0:04:26]  The other thing to look at, and now this is back to kind of just normal for everybody nowa -  days, could it be reduced a little bit as far as bulkiness goes? Again, would depend on the  appliance you're using, but just kind of, again, overall look at it. Is there anything that you  think that might need to be changed that could potentially be changed before the person  comes in? Or is it just wrong? It's the wrong material. It's not even for the... I had a com -  pany recently, and I'm sure they were extremely embarrassed about this, but they sent me  an appliance for me. So they have my scans, all that stuff. I'd actually broken their appli -  ance when I was lecturing. I was showing something with it and it broke, which wasn't  cool. But I let them know, and I'm like, hey, sorry, my bad. Could you send me another  one? They send me another one, and I look at it, and I'm like, that's not me. So the lower  was mine, and the upper wasn't mine. They'd mixed up mine with somebody else's, and  I'm sure that that other person got my upper and their own lower, and it was all screwed  up. So not cool, right? If a patient would have come in, and heaven forbid they had to drive  three hours or something like that one way, that'd be a real problem. So have this in your  standard operating procedures of let's make sure that we got what we think we need the  day or two before.  A Word About Digital   [0:05:59]  09/01/25   Page   of 2   19

SSC 2.0 - 205: Fitting A Custom OA  Let's talk a little bit about this digital thing because this is, more than likely, by the time  you're watching this, this is not some passing fancy, this digital here. This is where we're  at, okay? And it's almost shocking to me to meet a dentist now that doesn't have a scanner  and is still taking impressions. And I mentioned this before, that you really should get a  scanner because even if you are taking an impression, what's going on? Yeah, the lab is  scanning your impression, okay?  [0:06:35]  Actually, I even found out that the companies that hopefully, by the time you watch this,  they'll be gone and they don't even exist anymore. But right now, there is a company that  will send impression material, putty impression material, to a person. Like, a person can  just get online, order themselves this kit, they send the kit to the patient, they take their  own impression, and then what happens? Well, that impression is sent to a laboratory that  digitizes it. So they scan the impression, and then from then on out, the process is digital.  The appliance that I'm talking about in this analogy or this example, rather, is a thermo -  formed appliance. So they're scanning this impression that the person made in their  kitchen, and then they print physical models, and then they suck down material onto those  printed models and then send it back.  This Appliance..   [0:07:34]  So this appliance has everything to do with the scan. Okay, so this that I've got on the  screen is a nylon EMA, and it has nothing to do with the models.   Okay, now this can be,  again, you got to think this through a little bit. So let's say that you got a nylon EMA, and  so you got your nylon EMA here, and they give you models too. So as part of the deal, you  want models, and 'cause you want to have that record of the patient's teeth, or you wanted  actually a good reason to have models with a nylon appliance, is you can use it to loosen  the appliance a lot easier.  [0:08:24]  Tightening, you don't need the models, but to loosen it, the way we do this, and talk about  this more in another session in talking about kind of specifics of fitting appliances, but just  since I brought it up, and you're like, oh, what do you do? So you put a saran wrap or a  baggie over the model, heat the heck out of the nylon appliance, and then you stick it over  the baggie over the model, okay? So you have a spacer, in other words. So you put this  spacer down, baggie, and then you put it over it, and that will kind of flex out the material a  little bit, the nylon material that you put in boiling hot water for 30 seconds or a minute, and  then it's got that little bit of flexibility. That's how you loosen it.  [0:09:09]  So having the models is good, and that's what we do. We have the models, too, for all  these appliances. Nevertheless, though, to try the nylon appliance on the models in ad -  vance doesn't really make any sense, because this was printed with a nylon printer off of  09/01/25   Page   of 3   19

SSC 2.0 - 205: Fitting A Custom OA  the STL file for it, and these were printed on a different printer with the scans from up here  for this, okay? But this was not made on this. This was made from scans of the teeth, and  there was a design of the appliance, and that design is connected to the scan of the teeth.  Now you may say, yeah, but the scan of the teeth is what these models are.  [0:10:04]  Well, maybe, but there's little bits of inaccuracies thrown into this, and the printer and the  resin that you might use, and one model resin might be slightly different than another  model resin. So again, if you're a little older, you may remember back in dental school that  you had your gypsum, you had your different levels of stone, different types of stone, and  you had snap-stone that would set up really quick, and you had die stone, and you had all  these different stones, right? And your materials professor would tell you how important it  was to measure. You get out your graduated cylinder there, and you're like supposed to  measure it exactly right of how much water to put in there, and then you had your whip mix  thing that's like vacuum sucking all the air out and mixing the stone, and you would put the  water in there and kind of mix it up a little bit, and sometimes it seemed like there wasn't  enough water, and so you might just like add a little bit more or something, and then your  materials professor would say, and that just screwed it all up. If you change the recipe,  then you're going to get a different result. Well, that still exists. It's just now in the digital  world. So the printer itself will be slight differences with accuracy. The resins themselves  will be slightly different. How it was then handled afterwards, how was it cured? All of these  things will go into it.  [0:11:37]  So we have a lab, and so sometimes people might ask questions about the models and  the appliance, and it would all depend. Again, if you had an appliance that was made using  thermoforming methods, which they still are in 2025, there's lots of appliances that are  made using thermoforming materials. I would say the majority of appliances are still made  this way. Then, yeah, it was made on models. It was made on the printed models. And the  printed models may or may not be exactly the teeth. It's not quite as precise as when we  made impressions and poured them in stone. It's good, but it's not exact. And even the  way it's going to fit is a little bit different, right?  [0:12:21]  On the other hand, a milled appliance or a nylon appliance or a 3D printed acrylic appli -  ance, those have nothing to do with the models other than they're from the same scans.  But they weren't made on the models. Okay, I hope that makes sense and hopefully didn't  belabor that point too much, but just want to help you out as you're troubleshooting.  'Cause again, if you are in your 50s or beyond, troubleshooting used to be, well, does it fit  the die? Does it fit the model? Stuff like that. And you kind of can't do that anymore unless  it was a thermoformed appliance. Okay, and you'll go kind of nuts if it's not a thermoformed  appliance and you're trying to use these same principles, then those principles don't apply  anymore.  09/01/25   Page   of 4   19

SSC 2.0 - 205: Fitting A Custom OA  Before Fitting the Appliance   [0:13:04]  All right, now let's go to fitting appliances. So this is just a universal of any appliance. Tell  the patient what you're going to do. Next, tell the patient, so this is a really important step,  tell the patient that the appliance is going to be very tight and may be uncomfortable, but  that this sensation will likely reduce within a few seconds, okay? And you may say that last  part or you may not. But what I like to do is say, all right, okay, we're going to pop this in.  And I always do the upper first, and this is how my assistants do it. Say, this is probably  going to feel really tight, probably pretty uncomfortable, okay? And then you pop it in.  There's one guy that I think he's still teaching out there, and he added to my dialogue, he  said, this is going to be really tight, probably pretty uncomfortable. And oh, by the way, if  you have a crown or a bridge or anything like that, that the cement on that restoration has  failed over time, this won't be the why, but it's going to be the when.  [0:14:07]  In other words, we're about to pop that out, okay? Not a bad thing to add, 'cause if you  don't say something like that, and then you pull it out and there's a crown in it, then the pa -  tient thinks you did something wrong. You just screwed up their mouth or their teeth or  their restorations. On the other hand, if you say that and ask the patient, hey, so you've got  that crown here, you've got that bridge here, when were those placed? Oh, 25 years ago.  Okay, so heads up, the cements we were using 25 years ago, they're not quite the same  as the ones we use today. They, believe it or not, can kind of wash out over time. If that's  the case, then because of how this appliance is made and how precisely it fits your teeth,  it could actually pull off the crown or the bridge. If that happens, it's not that the appliance  caused that to happen.  [0:15:00]  It's actually a good thing that that happens because you have no idea that that cement is  gone. Typically what happens is the cement washes out, bacteria can get in there, next  thing you know you've got a toothache, stuff like that. So I'm not saying that's going to  happen, but if it does happen, it's actually not a bad thing. It's a positive thing 'cause that  means we caught something that we wouldn't have known otherwise. Okay? So there's  your dialogue. Think of doing something like that that's of your own use there, your dental  assistant's doing this. Again, bad news if something negative happens and the patient  wasn't sort of warned about it somehow, that's never a good thing.  Tell the Patient   [0:15:42]  Okay, next, tell the patient, and by the way, on the very tight and stuff, what I typically do  there is pop it in and then disappear. So if you pop it in on the upper and then walk behind  the patient and teach your staff to do this and just kind of count. 'Cause if you pop it in and  you're like, hey, is that tight anywhere? They're going to say yes. Think about this yourself.  09/01/25   Page   of 5   19

SSC 2.0 - 205: Fitting A Custom OA  And if you don't have this experience, then I know I've told you this before, but get as  many appliances as you can of different styles, different mechanisms of action, and try  them out. And that can be initially your first samples would be, I've got this pull appliance  and I've got this pull push appliance and I've got this interlocking appliance. And these are  ones I've all tried.  [0:16:33]  These are ones that I had made for myself so I could try them out. And here they are. And  these are my examples now, and here's what I found with each one. Do that. But why I  bring that up is if you have done that, it's very likely that when you put that in, it was like,  darn, that's tight. Okay, so I have lots of different appliances and all of the appliances that I  have right now have all been made on models, I think from like 2019-ish. So scans, rather,  of my teeth from 2019. And whenever I get a new appliance, I, on purpose, don't get new  scans. I go back to those 2019 scans, send them, and that's so that all my appliances are  made on the same scans. And what I will routinely note is that you put it in, and it's like,  ooh, that's snug. And then if I just sit there for a minute, then it's fine. So you just need a  little bit of time for that PDL to kind of loosen up a little bit and relax a little bit, and then it  will be fine. So again, maybe even on number two here, let the patient know, hey, these  were taken on scans of your teeth a month ago. We don't really notice this per se, but a  month, your teeth will move in a month, and it's just a little. But when we put this on your  teeth, it's going to pull them back to where they were a month ago, and that's probably go -  ing to be a little uncomfortable. But that will kind of settle down pretty quick, okay? So  here's the bottom line. Don't jump to adjusting the appliance immediately. Give the patient  a little bit of time to sit there and relax.  [0:18:10]  And then, number three, then we'll ask, is there any place rough? So the next kind of part  that I say is, is there any place rough, pokey, sharp, stabbing, anything like that? And that's  a little bit of a red herring, 'cause I know from advance we've checked, and you feel the  appliance with your fingers and make sure there's nothing sharp or pokey, and that'd be  very rare for that to be there anyway. But kind of check it out. And you know there's noth -  ing rough, and so the patient is probably not going to find anything rough. So why are you  even asking them? Well, you're just giving them something to look for to give a little bit  more time for that PDL to adjust, for them to adjust to the appliance. And it's also positive  for them to be kind of like, no, that feels good. Okay, is there any place real tight or uncom -  fortable? Point with one finger, if you could, to where that's bothering you. And oh, by the  way, you can be a little nitpicky on this, 'cause anything that bothers you right now is prob -  ably going to bother you a lot more at 2 o'clock in the morning, okay? Now that dialogue  works most of the time. Now there'll be some people that that's going to really open a can  of worms, and they're going to be with you an hour and a half later, 'cause they're going to  be nitpicky. Most people are not that way.  [0:19:28]  Most people will not tell you what's bothering them really. And so I think it is important to  kind of give them permission to let you know, 'cause again, what is the best appliance?  09/01/25   Page   of 6   19

SSC 2.0 - 205: Fitting A Custom OA  The best appliance is one they'll actually use, one they'll actually wear, and part of that is  your adjustment of that appliance. If it is uncomfortable pretty much in any way, they prob -  ably won't wear it at all.  It Takes Time   [0:19:54]  Okay, next I tell the patient that it usually takes most patients a few weeks to get used to  wearing the appliance through the night, okay? A few weeks to get used to wearing that  appliance through the night. Now is that true? Well, no, and it doesn't mean I'm lying to the  patient. It just means that I'm lowering their expectations. So the vast majority of your pa -  tients, in my experience, will wear the appliance through the night the first night. That's  normal.  [0:20:22]  So the rule is that they wear it through the night the first night. The exception to the rule is  that it takes them several weeks to get used to it. But better to be like, yeah, you're proba -  bly going to take you a few weeks to get used to this, okay? So something else I'll say is  like, hey, and tonight when you go to put this in, just put it in before bed, like maybe half  hour, an hour before bed, and watch a movie, read a book, do whatever, and your brain's  going to think, oh, I'm trying to eat this thing, so you're probably going to salivate like crazy.  And after a while, your brain will kind of be like, oh, okay, I guess this isn't food, so we can  kind of calm down the saliva there a little bit. You'll get used to having it in your mouth,  breathing through your nose, just kind of having it there. Then take it out, brush and floss  your teeth like we've asked you to, pop it back in your mouth, go to sleep. And if a half  hour later you're like, man, I'm still awake, I can't go to sleep with this thing, pop it out, try  again the next night, see if you get a little bit longer.  [0:21:18]  If you wake up at 2 in the morning and you're thinking, oh, I need to take this off, take it off.  And then maybe the next night you make it to 3 o'clock, 4 o'clock, so on. Give yourself a  break. You've never worn anything. You're how old? You're 47 years old? Okay, and you've  never worn anything on your teeth before to sleep? You haven't? Okay, so this is probably  going to take some getting used to. Okay, give them that kind of dialogue that allows them  to know that this is maybe going to take a little bit of time. Speaking of which, the person  who says, oh, I wear a night guard. In my experience, they're easy 'cause they're used to  wearing something in their mouth. Now this is twice as something in their mouth, but that  doesn't seem to be a problem. So people that historically have worn a night guard, they  tend to pick up to oral appliance therapy, no problem at all.  Fitting the EMA   [0:22:03]  09/01/25   Page   of 7   19

SSC 2.0 - 205: Fitting A Custom OA  Now I'm going to go over fitting an EMA and fitting a dorsal or an interlocking type of an  appliance. But most of the appliances are going to follow these same guidelines. The one  that I will then, so I'll talk about the EMA first or a pull appliance, I'll talk about a dorsal or  an interlocking appliance. And then I'll just kind of describe some of the challenges with the  appliance that in 2025 anyway, Medicare tends to push you towards, which is the push  style appliance or a Herbst, because it's different than what we're going to talk about with  all other appliances. It is actually different, and it's not different in a good way.  Fitting the Upper Tray   [0:22:58]  All right, so first, fit the upper tray, a few seconds, give them a little time like I said there,  any place too tight, uncomfortable, rough or pokey? Okay, so that's giving them the looking  for something. So we just have the upper tray in, nothing else. Okay, have them point with  one finger, adjust that area, repeat this until the patient says, yep, that feels okay, okay?  Fitting the Lower Tray   [0:23:17]  Then we fit the lower tray in the same manner. One point I like to make is fitting oral appli -  ances, it's just two night guards, so don't lose your mind here that there's something like  super magical about these oral appliances for sleep apnea that you just can't possibly un -  derstand or that your staff can't. It's a night guard, okay? When you're having your team  learn how to do this, it's a night guard, it's an upper night guard and a lower night guard,  and they're attached in some way, okay? So I like to teach it that way so that you don't flip  out here, so it's just a night guard, relax, we're not talking something that you've never had  any experience with here. Okay, so upper tray, I do first, you can do it the other way  around, I don't care, but upper tray just tends to be just a little bit more straightforward,  heads up, if they're fleshy, then put your fingers in there, this would be the same as a night  guard, so again, nothing special about the oral appliance, but put your fingers in there or  have your assistant do that and kind of push their cheek out of the way, 'cause the only  bummer with the first experience with, this could happen with a night guard too, is you  grab their cheek in that, and if it's an all hard appliance, it will stamp on there and pinch  them and they'll bleed, and as you know from lots of experience, a little blood in the mouth  seems like they're bleeding to death, so that's not great either, so if you can avoid them  snapping their cheeks in there, that is a positive thing to do.  Insert Both the Upper and Lower   [0:24:49]  09/01/25   Page   of 8   19

SSC 2.0 - 205: Fitting A Custom OA  All right, number three, insert both the upper and lower and check to see if the posterior  pads are hitting on both sides, okay? Now, note that I don't say hit evenly on both sides  here, so you're going to have the patient sitting up or they can be laying down at this point,  I don't care how you have them in your chair, you know why I don't care? Because they're  not sleeping in your chair, so if you're like, oh, well, I'm going to lay them down 'cause it's  going to be more similar to them sleeping, okay. If you're like, I want to sit them up be -  cause it's going to be easier for me to, I'll be in front of them and seeing them, all right. I'm  going to lay them down because I'm going to sit behind them like a real dentist always  does sitting behind their patient, okay, that's cool, you do you, doesn't matter to me.  [0:25:35]  We have our patients sitting up, our assistants and us, we're always in front of the patient  when we're doing stuff with them, so that's how we've become comfortable with it. In my  experience, real dentists like to be behind their patient 'cause that's where they tend to  spend time, so they'll kind of do it that way. Does not matter because the patient's not  sleeping in your chair anyway, okay? Doesn't matter, so however you want to do it, fine by  me. However, in whatever position they're in, you're going to put these trays together, up -  per and lower, in at the same time, no bands yet, and then say, hey, go ahead and tap  your teeth together. Does it feel like it's hitting on both sides? That's the question, does it  feel like it's hitting on both sides? And don't say, does it feel like it's hitting evenly on both  sides because then that could be two hours later the patient's like, well, let me think, hmm,  yeah, I'm not sure, it's maybe, 48, 52 maybe, you know, 48 on the right, 52 on the left. No,  we don't go down that road.  [0:26:35]  And remember, and let's go ahead and reinforce this 'cause it may have been a while  since you watched the Level 1 stuff. Head posture has an impact on this, so let's do that  together. You may remember this in Level 1 unless you just jumped to these videos in  Level 2 'cause you're like, I don't need the basic stuff, I don't need that TMD stuff, who  needs that? You just jumped straight to the dental sleep medicine stuff 'cause that's what  you're excited about. You know who you are. I see you, I know what you did.  [0:27:08]  Okay, but if you did Level 1, if you did them in order, then you remember this. If you didn't,  then here's the drill. Look straight ahead, sitting down, wherever you are right now, just  look straight ahead, tap your teeth together. Now tilt your head up and look at the ceiling or  the sky or wherever you are, just look up, tap your teeth together. Okay, now look down  and tap your teeth together. Okay, now from my microphone, you probably heard different  sounds, right? So you hear the difference? That's 'cause it's three different bites, okay?  And for you, it's probably three different bites, too. And then if you remember in Level 1,  turn your head to the side. Turn your head to the other side. Now, if you do that lightly, if  you do it at enough force, it'll kind of force it. But if you do it lightly, those are different bites  too. So you're not looking for even, because even, even how? Even with them leaning  back a little bit with their head 45 degrees to the right because you're coming at them from  the right, from their right. That would be different than this way, or lean back farther, or sit -  09/01/25   Page   of 9   19

SSC 2.0 - 205: Fitting A Custom OA  ting up straight. So we don't want to get too hung up about the evenness. You don't need  to whip out your T-scan and to try to get these pads hitting perfectly even. You just want  both sides.  [0:28:35]  So, back to the story. Do you feel you hit on both sides? Yes. Then you look and you see if  they are. And this will surprise you, but lots of times they're not. So they're like, oh yeah,  uh-huh, yeah, yeah, I think so. And then you look in and you clearly see that only one  side's hitting. Okay, it won't be like Shimstock level here. We're just talking wide open on  one side. When you see that, then you have a choice to make. Am I going to take down  the high side or build up the low side? Okay? What do you think I'm going to typically tell  you to do? Remember the bite? The bite record? The George Gauge? How do I like to  take the bite and stuff like that? You think I'm going to build it up or take it down? Did you  say take it down? You would be correct. So taking it down at first would be definitely what I  would do. So we would take down the advantage of having the pads.  [0:29:36]  So a EMA appliance as a pull appliance has the pads. Silent Nite pull appliance does not  have pads. And the difference is now you may say, well, okay, so the EMA starts higher.  That's true. But the nice thing about the pads is it's easier to adjust 'cause you only have a  limited amount of plastic that you're grinding on to get it hitting on both sides. Whereas if  it's hitting on the teeth, if it's teeth to teeth on the trays, that can be harder to get it to be,  even if it's off significantly on one side or the other, right? You might have to end up adding  plastic. So think of the EMA as part of the manufacturing process. They've already added  plastic to build it up a little bit, and then you can take it down easier. And that's what I  would do 'cause I want that to be lower vertical whenever possible, okay? There will be  some occasions where building it up will be the right thing to do. Just thinking off the top of  my head here where that could happen is if it's hitting on the pad, but you also see it hitting  in the front teeth, and then it's not hitting on the pad on the other side. Then you would  need to build up the pad on that side because it's already hitting in two spots. So lowering  this pad won't help you 'cause it's still going to hit in the front. Does that make sense? So  bottom line, we want it hitting on both sides. You want to visually confirm that it's hitting on  both sides. As soon as we're there, then we're good. Next step.  Add the 20 Yellow Band   [0:31:01]  So the next step is we're going to put these bands on. So I'll go ahead and read this. Add  the 20 yellow band. This is the band that correlates with your George Gauge bite registra -  tion. Now that is sort of true and sort of isn't, depending on where your appliance is made.  Options for a pull appliance, or let's be specific about the EMA. As of 2025, here are your  options. You could have this made by a laboratory, and depending on the laboratory, they  may or may not even use your George Gauge. That's not cool, right? But that's just the  09/01/25   Page   of 10   19

SSC 2.0 - 205: Fitting A Custom OA  way it is. So if you're going to use a lab, you need to know, are you using my George  Gauge or not? So our in-house lab, JRS Lab, we use your George Gauge. And your  George Gauge will be a 20 band, okay? We put the buttons 20 millimeters apart, always,  at your George Gauge, okay? Why is the longest band on a pull appliance is a 21? So you  can go backwards if needed. Okay, if you do the 20 in the patient, which we'll get to in a  second, the patient's like, ah, it's too far forward, then you got the 21 to go back to, okay?  You can go forward, 19, 18, 17, 16, 15, 14, 13 forward.  [0:32:18]  Now, that's how our lab does it. That's not actually technically how EMA tells labs to do it.  EMAs in their instructions, for example, if you were to get the kits, which you can buy cur -  rently from Glidewell, and you could do this in-house. And in there, it'll say to put the but -  tons 26 millimeters apart. Well, with the 26 millimeter apart button, if you put the 20 mil -  limeter band on there, how far forward is that? Six millimeters? That's right. So six millime -  ters forward, that's a lot. So I don't like that. So that's not how we do it. So 20 millimeters  will be your George Gauge wherever you set that George Gauge, okay? So that's our lab.  I've taught that. So if you use the nylon EMA and you go through JRS Lab as a Spencer  Study Club member, that's what you want to do 'cause it will cost you less money that way.  And it will also be done my style, so to speak. So it will be your George Gauge will be  used. That'll be a 20 band. And you always know what's going on, okay? So that's it. But if  you're using some other lab, if you're somewhere else in the world and you're like, yeah, I  can't use JRS Lab, I'm in Germany, they may do it different. Just talk to them and make  sure that they understand this is what you want. And they should be able to do it for you is  I want these buttons at my George Gauge to be a 20 band.  [0:33:44]  All right, back to this. Ask the patient, does that feel like it's holding your jaw slightly for -  ward? It's holding your jaw too far forward, or does it feel like it's not doing anything?  Okay? So the options here are, and I'll use slightly different words here, does it feel like it's  jacking your jaw way forward, does it feel like it's keeping your jaw from falling backwards,  or does it feel like it's not doing anything at all? Okay? So our options are too far forward,  keeping the jaw from falling backwards, or not doing anything at all. What do you think  we're going for? Keeping the jaw from falling backwards. So where we want to start the  patient is that comfortably protruded of keeping my jaw from falling backwards. So it  should feel like it's doing something, but it also shouldn't feel like it's way far forward,  okay? That's your goal, is should feel like it's keeping your jaw from falling backwards,  okay?  [0:34:40]  All right. So if they say that it's too far forward, then you've got your 21 band. If they say it's  not doing anything at all, then the 19 yellow. Now with a pull appliance, this next phase,  this next thing is not, it's easier said than done. But with all appliances, you should be able  to look in the mouth and see if the appliance is active or not. So a pull appliance would be  active if the band is stretched a little. Okay? That means it's actually doing something. So  you've got them, let's say they're laying down a little bit. You've got them relaxed. Does  09/01/25   Page   of 11   19

SSC 2.0 - 205: Fitting A Custom OA  that feel like it's jacking your jaw forward? It's keeping your jaw from falling back or this is  doing nothing at all. Yeah, it feels like it's keeping my jaw from falling back. Cool. Just relax  there. Relax for me. I'm going to kind of pull your cheek back. We're going to see. And if  you saw the band folded in, kind of buckled forward, like a bulge in it, then it's not doing  anything. So for it to be doing something, it would need to be at tension. It'd be lengthened  and maybe even stretched a titch, okay? So yellow, you'd be able to see that stretch a little  bit.  [0:35:55]  Does that make sense? So if it's not at tension, then it's actually not doing anything be -  cause the person's jaw is not back. They're actually forward from that, okay? It's not hold -  ing their jaw from falling backwards. If it's shortened, okay, that means they need a shorter  band to do something. The patient's actually holding their jaw farther forward than the  band has them, okay? Make sure you understand that. That's an important point to know if  it is doing something or if it is not doing something.  Show the Patient How to Change the Bands   [0:36:32]  All right, next steps. Show the patient how to change the bands. It's pretty darn simple.  And then this you can kind of play around with a little bit, but one way to do it would be  give the patient a white band in the same number as the yellow that you're starting with,  like a 20, and a blue band in the same number. So all 20s. Now, other options would be to  maybe start them in a blue band and then give them a millimeter farther back, a 21 blue,  start them at a 20 blue, and move them to a 19 blue. So let me give you pros and cons of  that. We like to get our patients onto blue bands. Why? Because blue bands last longer  and yellow bands stretch out quicker.  [0:37:15]  So your call, and remember that the EMA is really the only appliance on the market right  now that has that squishy factor to it. So that squishiness word, you can take advantage of  that depending on what's going on with the patient. And if they have any concerns about a  TMJ problem, they're concerned about their dental implant, they're concerned about their  veneers, then I would start soft, right? I'd start with a yellow band, and this is going to put  their mind at ease that they're not going to hurt themselves because that's going to be the  weak link. Remember me talking about that? That's going to be the thing that's going to  stretch out or potentially even break before they break. However, having the patient on yel -  lows, if they are going to stretch them out, they're going to stretch it out much quicker. So  we try to move people to blues pretty quick. So our pretty much standard protocol nowa -  days is blue, and so we would give them the blue 20, which is where we're going to start.  That's our George Gauge. We'd give them a blue 21 to go backwards if they needed to,  and a blue 19 to go forward a millimeter.  09/01/25   Page   of 12   19

SSC 2.0 - 205: Fitting A Custom OA  Give the Patient a White Band - Fill out the EMA Band Form   [0:38:17]  Again, another option that you could try is as I've got it written down here on the slide,  which would be 20 yellow, 20 white, and the white's softer, so it's going to go back a little  bit. 20 blue is a little bit firmer, and that's going to be less in either direction, right?   So the  white is going to relax the jaw a bit. The blue is going to be stiffer. Probably it's all going to  be about a millimeter too, so it's not a huge difference doing it that way. It's just using the  different color bands. So that's totally up to you. Your goal, the big goal there is, the big  take-home message, give them a way to go backwards, give them a way to go forwards.  Okay, that's what we're talking about. And you remember me talking about in Level 1 with  the appliance selection, one of the cool things about your pull style appliances is you're in  charge of the jaw position. So the patient can't go jacking their jaw forward eight millime -  ters unless you let them, unless you gave them the bands. A common mistake, if you will,  with the Silent Nite appliance, and this just kind of goes with a lot of people using the  Silent Nite that have no idea what they're doing, is I've seen dentists give the patient the  entire kit of bands, like, here you go, good luck. And then the patient has the ability to bring  their jaw forward six, seven, eight millimeters, perhaps. That's a bad idea. So don't just  give the patient a bajillion bands. Give them the bands you want to give them, and then let  them know that you're going to follow up. And even if you're going to follow up via telemed -  icine and they're doing fabulous, then you can send them bands, things like that. You want  to stay in control over that jaw position.  [0:39:56]  Okay, so then we got the instructions and we give this to them, all of this stuff, and kind of  the new versions of these, which really haven't changed that much. So oral appliance  therapy, since Spencer Study Club 1.0, really hasn't changed that much. There's a couple  appliances maybe that came on the market since then, but the mechanism of actions have  not changed. There's nothing in 2025 that has changed from 2018 as far as the different  appliances. They all do the same thing, anchor to the maxilla, keep the lower jaw from fall -  ing backwards. But in your document center, you have these documents and they're Word  documents so that you can modify them to your heart's content and put in whatever you  want, make it specific to your practice.  Fitting a Dorsal   [0:40:43]  All right, now let's go on to a dorsal or an interlocking appliance. So this is going to be  starting off, it's going to be the same. We're going to fit the upper tray, wait a little bit, do  the whole thing of too tight, is it rough, pokey, all that kind of stuff. So upper tray first, and  then we do the lower tray just like we did with the pull appliance, nothing special there.  Then we fit the upper and the lower and have them tap, tap, tap. And does that feel like it's  09/01/25   Page   of 13   19

SSC 2.0 - 205: Fitting A Custom OA  hitting on both sides? Visually inspect. Now, a typical interlocking appliance, trying to think  of, I can't think of any off top of my head, interlocking appliances that have little pads or  anything like that. So they almost always have these smooth surfaces that are hitting up -  per and lower. And as I mentioned with the pull appliance, that can be a bit of a bummer  'cause it's more to reduce or you may just have to add 'cause it's just too big of a hassle to  reduce it.  [0:41:48]  So keep that in mind. And one of the things too, with any type of interlocking appliance, is  as you bring the jaw forward, well, excuse me, I shouldn't say that with an interlocking ap -  pliance. With every appliance on the market, as you bring the jaw forward, it changes how  it's going to hit. 'Cause think about, we've got the articular eminence there. So unless you  started them all the way down here, then bringing them forward theoretically wouldn't  change that much in the jaw joint. But if you started them somewhere down the eminence,  but not all the way down the eminence, when they open a little bit, when they come a little  bit farther forward, there's going to be, it's called Bennett shift, right? It's going to open  their back teeth a little bit and change how they fit, okay?  [0:42:31]  So sometimes there's certain manufacturers are like, oh yeah, we're so precise and all this  kind of stuff. Yeah, no, you're not. So as soon as you bring that jaw forward, the only way  that you could have an appliance made that would take that into account was if you mar -  ried it with a cone beam CT, as well as jaw tracking information to know exactly where that  jaw is going to go. Even that I wouldn't think would be that good because as I've talked  about before too, when you're taking protrusive records and things like that, patients never  done that in their life. So they are not going to be good at it. And who's to say that that's  actually how their jaw comes forward, okay? So don't get too worked up about that. But  bottom line with the, all the other appliances, other than the pull appliances and other than  the pull appliances with some sort of button posterior support, don't be surprised if it takes  a little bit more to adjust that vertical.  A Little Tip   [0:43:32]  Now, a little tip is if you do need to take the vertical down, then the best way to do that is  on the upper 'cause the lower here has these big old fins. And so the lower, the only way  you're going to take that down is with a burr. And that's going to be a hassle where the up -  per, if you needed to go down a bit, you could just take that whole thing and stick it on your  lathe and take it down uniformly. All right. Can't do that forever, obviously, so you're going  to kind of split the difference typically with any of these appliances. The pull appliance, like  I said before, normally if you need to change the vertical on that, it's just going to be those  pads, It's what they're there for. But with other appliances, you're typically going to split the  09/01/25   Page   of 14   19

SSC 2.0 - 205: Fitting A Custom OA  difference and do a little bit on the top, a little bit on the bottom, doing whatever makes  sense there and is the most convenient.  [0:44:22]  Okay, now, next, we've got the hitting on both sides. Then it's going to be put them in and  see if it's doing anything. It's going to be the exact same questions of does this feel like it's  jacking your jaw way forward, doing nothing at all, or keeping your jaw from falling back -  wards? Okay? Does it feel like it's jacking your jaw forward, doing nothing at all, or keeping  your jaw from falling backwards? Once they say, yeah, it kind of feels like it's keeping my  jaw from falling backwards. Okay, awesome. And then you look. And right here where  these things are touching, so where the lower tray and the upper tray meet on any inter -  locking appliance, that's why I call it interlocking, is there's some interlocking mechanism.  If that mechanism is open, so let's say this is the lower jaw, this is the upper jaw, and these  things are touching in some way. If that is an open space, okay? So if you can see some  space between those pieces of plastic, then it ain't doing nothing.  [0:45:21]  Okay, that makes sense? There's a space there, it's not doing anything. Okay, so then you  would take the appliance out, you'd crank it multiple turns. Okay, you've kind of figured out,  oh, it's about a millimeter. And whatever your appliance mechanism is, it's going to say  how many turns that is for a millimeter, and you're going to bring that mechanism up,  you're going to pop it back in, and then you ask the same questions. Does that feel like it's  now, a little adjustment there, does it feel like it's taking your jaw way far forward, not doing  anything at all, or keeping your jaw from falling backwards? And then they'll typically say,  oh, there we go, yeah, okay, yeah, that's keeping my jaw from falling backwards now.  Okay, cool.  [0:45:55]  Okay, so that is the key, is fit the trays, hit both sides, not necessarily evenly, but just both  sides, and then is it doing something? Okay, that is, we have to go through that with every  different appliance. Same deal then, you're going to have your specific instructions for this  appliance. Now, most oral appliances come with kind of manufacturer instructions and stuff  like that. Typically, we don't give those to the patient. You could, but if you do, I would still  have your own, okay? 'Cause your own instructions are going to be how you want it done,  okay? So if it goes into any detail at all on the manufacturer instruction on how to adjust it  or stuff like that, that's okay, but that may not be how you want it done. So go ahead and  do this to how you want it done, how fast you want them to bring the jaw forward. All that  kind of stuff is up to you. I'll talk in additional sessions here on how to decide when we go  forward or backwards and stuff like that, but I would put these things into your notes that  are on your letterhead so that it's all, this is how I do it every time versus I gave them the  thing from the company and this is what the company said, but that's not what I told them  to do, okay? We go over this with the patient, help them understand. So for example, too,  on this appliance, we've got a jack screw. You note the arrow there. So on the left side of  that specific appliance, you're going to have to go up with the arrow to bring the jaw for -  ward.  09/01/25   Page   of 15   19

SSC 2.0 - 205: Fitting A Custom OA  [0:47:34]  On the other side, it's going to be down with the arrow just to be confusing, but that's just  basically how screws work, right? So it's a righty-tighty type of thing, and when you put it  on the other side, it changes that. It's still righty-tighty technically, but you're going to go in  a different direction because it's flipped around. So go over all of that with patients so that  they know. Now, sometimes if you're a super beginner in this, you may say, eh, you know  what? I think I will adjust the appliances for the patient. I don't think I'll let them do that.  That's fine. That's going to get old pretty quick, having people come in so that you can go  one, two, three, four, five, goodbye. So pretty quick, you're going to be having your pa -  tients do this on their own. The vast majority of people will do this on their own. Every once  in a while, you'll have people with poor vision, dexterity. Getting the little wrench into that  little hole on the jack screw is not the easiest thing in the world to do. When you first do  this, you'll probably have to wear loops to do that. But they can, or they'll have somebody  that can help them.  [0:48:38]  So maybe grandma has her grandson help her with that, and that's how this gets done,  okay? But usually, they'll be able to do this at home. Explain, just like we do with every ap -  pliance, how critical that the follow-up is. Now, this appliance, they're in control, so this isn't  like the pull appliances where you can hold back the bands. This one, if you remember me  talking about the magic paper clip, so this one is brought forward with a wrench, a.k.a. A  magic paper clip. And they don't need whatever magic paper clip came from the manufac -  turer. If they've got their own paper clip at home, they can put it in that hole and move it.  So you're not in control, and they could take their jaw a lot farther forward than you expect  them to, and there could be other hilarity ensue if they don't come back for follow-up. So  just make sure they understand that, make sure they understand that the likelihood of hav -  ing side effects, if they don't follow your instructions, are greatly, greatly, greatly increased.  [0:49:44]  Now, let me just cover a couple things over the other two mechanisms of action that I  haven't talked about, the four main ones, right? So the fifth one is the Mono blocks that  you're probably never going to use in your life anyway. So we won't really talk about that.  But our four main mechanisms of action, we have our pull that we covered, we have our  interlocking that we covered, but we haven't talked about the anterior pull-push TAP style  appliances or the push, which are the Herbst-style appliances. So real quick, on the TAP  style appliances, and most of them are TAPs, same thing, upper and lower tray. Then the  next step is not necessarily completely obvious 'cause you put them together and you're  not necessarily checking the occlusion until it's hooked. So the anterior pull-push, the TAP  style appliances, you're typically going to jump to together, okay? And you're going to put it  together, find, so you're going to do it slightly out of order. You're going to put it together.  And then the nice thing with the anterior pull-push style appliances, the TAP style appli -  ances, is you can adjust that position while it's in their mouth, which is cool. So they're kind  of laying back a little bit. Just say, hey, just completely relax. Let your jaw just kind of fall  09/01/25   Page   of 16   19

SSC 2.0 - 205: Fitting A Custom OA  back. Let your jaw completely relax. I'm going to turn this screw here until you say you feel  it keeping your jaw from falling backwards, okay?  [0:51:07]  We're not going for pulling your jaw forward. At first, it's going to feel like it's doing nothing  at all 'cause it's not doing anything at all. And then eventually I'm going to get to a point  here where you say, yeah, right there, that's keeping my jaw from falling backwards. Okay,  so that's pretty cool with that style of appliance. That applies to the myTAP, the temporary  appliance, or flexTAP, or dreamTAP, or TAP 3, or whatever, all pretty much the same.  You're just going to lay them back, turn, turn, turn, turn. Eventually they're like, yep, that's  it. And then even let them sit there for a second. And this applies to all appliances, actually.  After they've told you, yeah, that feels like it's just keeping my jaw from falling backwards,  something else that we like to do, unless the patient's in a big rush or we're in a big rush, is  let them lay there for a while, okay? Just let them lay there, relax, and say, completely re -  lax your jaw. The appliance's job is to keep your jaw from falling backwards, not your job.  Okay, you're not helping it, okay? Which, by the way, we'll talk about that in just a minute,  with avoiding side effects. They don't have their lateral pterygoid contracted all night long,  okay?  [0:52:12]  The appliance is keeping their jaw from falling backwards. They're not having to do that.  So let them relax, sit there, and then that way before they're released, your assistant or  you can come in and say, all right, we still good? Or does that feel like it's too far forward,  not doing anything at all? What do you think?Actually, that does feel a little bit forward.  Cool. Turn, change the band, whatever. How's that now? Oh my gosh, that feels great.  Good. Okay, you want them leaving the office going like, yeah, that feels good. That was  great. That's a good first experience. All right, so with the TAP, same thing. Turn it, turn it,  turn it. Yep, that's it. Now once they're to the spot where they're like, yeah, that feels like  it's keeping my jaw from falling backwards, then you can say, okay, give me a little bit of a  chomp, chomp, chomp, and does that feel like it's hitting on both sides? And then they say  yes or no, and then you look with your eyeballs to see if it's hitting on both sides and make  sure it's hitting on both sides. But that appliance, we are going to do those steps out of or -  der because we need it connected 'cause if it's not connected, then the anterior parts are  usually smacking into each other, and you wouldn't actually know if it's hitting on both  sides or not. So that appliance, the anterior pull push, or I will just say TAP appliances  'cause that's pretty much the only ones on the market now, is you're going to check once  it's engaged.  Push or Herbst-Style Appliances   [0:53:28]  Okay, then the other one is your push appliance or Herbst-style appliances. Now this one  is kind of a pain in the butt 'cause what can't you do with a Herbst that you could do with  09/01/25   Page   of 17   19

SSC 2.0 - 205: Fitting A Custom OA  every other appliance? Take it apart. Now you could take it apart, and sometimes you will  take it apart, but as a rule of thumb or as a general rule, as a standard operating proce -  dure, you're not going to take it apart. Why not? 'Cause when you do, you're going to lose  the stupid bolts and stuff, and now, unless you have a kit of a whole bunch of different little  bolts that you could stick in there, you're going to lose them and have a problem. So most  people will not separate the bars from a Herbst appliance and fit the trays separately.  [0:54:15]  Now remember, you can, right? So at some time in the future, you're going to be working  with a Herbst appliance, and that's going to come in handy for you to know that, well, I  could take the bars off, and that will allow you to then adjust it one tray at a time if the pa -  tient's not communicating to you well with what's bothering them. Okay, that's usually  where I've had to use that, is the patient's like, ah, it's just too tight. Where? I'm not sure.  Oh, my gosh. Right? And you're like, I'm like you should be able to know this. But if they  can't communicate to you where it is, then I'll take the bars off, do it one tray at a time, and  then usually that'll be able to narrow it down. Then I've got to put the bars back on. In gen -  eral, though, you're going to put it in as a sandwich the first time.  [0:55:01]  This is one of the things I don't like about Herbst-style appliances is that initial experience  for the patient is a little overwhelming for some people. It's kind of a big deal, especially if  they've never worn a night guard before. That's a lot of stuff to stick in your mouth. And  remember, these people, as a rule, have airway issues. Yeah? That's kind of why they're in  the office, yes? So you stuff their mouth with plastic, and that can give them a little anxiety.  Most of these people have accentuated gag reflexes, and they're oftentimes claustropho -  bic. These are the people that will tell you, yeah, I'm so glad you guys don't use those old-  school impression materials anymore, 'cause I always used to gag. Sometimes I'd even  feel like I was going to throw up. These are the people we're dealing with, and now you  give them all this plastic to deal with, and that's their first impression. I don't like that. But,  it's just the way it is, right? So, if you are going to take the bars off and risk losing the bolts  and stuff, which I encourage you to not take the bars off, 'cause you will lose those, you  put it in as one piece, and then you have to go through the same thing as before. It's like,  okay, just think about the upper for a second. Is there any place that's really tight or un -  comfortable? Now think about the lower. Okay, now it's already in your mouth. Give me a  chomp, chomp, chomp. And is it hitting on both sides? Okay, and check visually. And then  the last thing would be, does it feel like it's doing nothing at all, jacking your jaw way for -  ward, or keeping your jaw from falling backwards?  [0:56:35]  Now remember that on a push-style appliance, we might, or very likely will, need the rub -  ber bands. We need the little elastic thingies. If they have a steeper mandibular angle like I  do, then their jaw is just going to fall backwards with a Herbst-style appliance. If their  mouth opens at all, they're just going to kind of come back. So that appliance, it is very  nice to have those elastics on. Could you put them on right from the get-go? Uh-huh. So  you just put those on, give it to them as a sandwich, they close into it, we go through our  09/01/25   Page   of 18   19

SSC 2.0 - 205: Fitting A Custom OA  checklist there, and then the last thing after checking to, hey, what's that doing? Yeah, it  feels like it's keeping my jaw from falling backwards. Then you're going to look. Okay, on a  Herbst-style appliance, what you're looking for is there's going to be, it depends on the  Herbst bar, but usually you're going to be able to tell because if it is not doing anything,  once again, it's going to be not at tension.  [0:57:38]  So a Herbst, the reason I call it a push appliance is it pushes the jaw forward, right? So  what you'd be looking for there is that they can bring their jaw backwards and it would just  like kind of come back easily. So that means it's not actually doing anything. So if they  bring their jaw, if you have a Herbst appliance, you can bring your jaw forward as far as  you want 'cause that's just bringing that mechanism out. There will be something that  stops your jaw from going backwards, okay? So that's what you would kind of look for is  you'd have them relax and then say, okay, just do me a favor and just kind of relax your  jaw more, maybe give them a little bit of a push. And if you see it go backwards, then it's  not doing anything and you would need to bring that mechanism slightly more forward until  it is stopping their jaw from going backwards, okay?  [ 0:58:25]  So that is your push style appliances. And remember, depending on the push style appli -  ance that you decide to use, sometimes those can be super-duper confusing where they  have a mechanism that's like down on one side, up on the other side. As of the recording  of this video, my favorite Herbst-style appliance is Glidewell's. It's called the Silent Nite  with the Glidewell Hinge. And the reason I like that so much is it has a different Herbst  mechanism that they created where you adjust it from the front. And it's righty-tighty,  righty-tighty. So they're adjusting it the same way, both sides, not up on one side and down  on the other side. That's a lot easier to use. Plus, if you remember me talking about the  pull-push just a second ago with the TAP appliances where you can adjust it in the mouth,  you can do the same with the Silent Nite with the Glidewell hinge because you can stick in  your Allen wrench and turn, turn, turn, turn, turn, turn. Okay, does that feel like it's keeping  your jaw from falling backwards? Not yet. Okay, turn, turn, turn, turn, turn, turn. How about  now? Yep, we're there. Cool. That's a lot easier than the ones with the little up and down  mechanism, which usually you're going to take that out of the mouth. You wouldn't have to  necessarily, but most of us would. Okay, so hopefully that covers all the different appli -  ances and how you're going to fit these.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 19   19

