SSC 2.0 - 504: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 2  SSC 2.0   Level 5  504: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 2  [intro music]  Be Mindful of What You Eat!   [0:00:12]  So what about eating before bed? Well, going to bed starving is probably not going to help  your sleep. But on the other hand, going to bed stuffed is for sure not either. So this is an -  other thing that is individual in nature of how this works. I've heard some people that will  eat quite late at night, and these are kind of like health influencers and stuff, and they're  taking in their last meal very, very late compared to what I would do. There is a correlation  with late eating and weight gain and stuff like that, and you probably know that yourself.  One of the easiest way for a lot of people to lose a few pounds is to just not eat anything  after six o'clock at night or seven o'clock at night. However, some people, like one of my  business partners, Dr. Mangelson, he found when he got a continuous glucose monitor  that if he had a little high-protein snack right before bed, so say like peanut butter on cel -  ery or something like that, that his blood glucose was more stable during the night and he  slept much better.  [0:01:27]  And that actually went on, that was one of the things that he did that helped him lose a  bunch of weight. So consider this. Again, I'm experimenting with that as well, with having a  little bit of a protein type of snack before bedtime, versus in the past I've been very strict  about no calories at all after a certain point of the day. Playing around with that, the eating  a little bit of protein right before I go to bed has not seemed to affect my weight at all, feels  fine. So experiment with that yourself with your patients. But a big meal right before bed is  for sure not healthy. Going to bed feeling like you're starving to death, probably not good  either.  Sleep Promoting Fruits   [0:02:09]  If you are going to eat before bedtime, well, what kind of things could you eat that might  actually improve your sleep? Well, there are sleep-promoting fruits, and these can be con -  nected with some protein. So certain fruits such as kiwi, avocado, bananas are naturally  rich in melatonin, serotonin, magnesium, which can gently enhance sleep quality when  eaten in the evening, two to three hours before bed. Pair with a light protein or healthy fat  like yogurt or nuts to stabilize blood sugar and prevent nighttime awakening.  09/01/25   Page   of 1   13

SSC 2.0 - 504: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 2  [0:02:38]  So like I said, Dr. Mangelson did this and it helped his sleep and helped him in his weight  loss journey as well. Now note that this information is from realsimple.com. So is there any  actual scientific evidence on this? Well, turns out there is. So this 2023 study looked at  specifically kiwis, and the author said eating two kiwis one hour before bed for four weeks  led to a 47% drop in time awake, 27% fewer nighttime awakenings, and one extra hour of  total sleep in athletes. Whoa. Sleep efficiency jumped from 86% to 93%, and athletes re -  ported less fatigue and better morning alertness. Wow. And that is the title of this, The Im -  pact of Kiwi fruit Consumption on the Sleep and Recovery of Elite Athletes. Now, that's a  really, really, really big deal for people that are looking for 1% improvement in all sorts of  different ways. To go from 86% to 93% sleep efficiency, that's pretty good. So to maybe try  this for you and your family, definitely worth a try. I guarantee you I have never eaten two  kiwis an hour before bed ever. So to do this four weeks in a row, that would be pretty  amazing to do that. I think I will definitely try to replicate this study in my own life.  Consider Magnesium!   [0:04:13]  What about magnesium? You've probably heard that taking a magnesium supplement can  help your sleep. Also, magnesium is found in pretty high quantities in nuts, dark leafy  greens, whole grains, dairy products, and some soy-based foods. So some evidence on  that. There have been various studies, and a systematic review revealed the association  between magnesium and sleep quality. Observational studies have shown that magnesium  intake levels are negatively associated with daytime falling asleep, snoring, sleep duration,  things like that. So in other words, they improve all of those things if you have higher mag -  nesium intakes. The randomized clinical trials that have been done in this area also show  positive effects of magnesium with overall sleep scores and sleep efficiency, and total  sleep time. So definitely something worth experimenting with in your own sleep, in your  family members. It can't hurt.  Good Mattress and Bedding   [0:05:14]  What about having a good mattress and bedding? Well, intuitively, you know that that is a  big deal, and you probably have invested reasonably in your sheets and pillows and mat -  tress and stuff like that. This can be one of the problems with travel as you get older is you  don't want to go anyplace because their sheets aren't as nice or their pillows aren't as nice  or when you do go to some resort and they've really invested in those things, you're like,  whoa, I want to take this home with me. Funny that some of those resorts actually literally  have a catalog of that you can get those products sent to your home. But is there some  evidence on this? Well, certainly there is. So in this 2021 study looked at the firmness of  09/01/25   Page   of 2   13

SSC 2.0 - 504: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 2  mattresses, found that medium to firm mattresses offered advantages for people with back  pain and whatnot. But then as we talked a little bit ago with the temperature manipulation,  using the mattress pads and things like that, as well as nowadays, it's super duper com -  mon for mattresses to be in the marketing materials to talk about their cooling nature, pil -  lows with their cooling nature, stuff like that. Is there evidence that that helps? Well, yeah,  cooling mattress covers and things like that have been shown to increase slow wave  sleep, sleep continuity. Using these temperature-regulating systems have been shown to  increase deep sleep. And everybody that I know that's using this would attest to that.  Sleep Position   [0:06:46]  What about sleep position? So in treating people with obstructive sleep apnea, we know  that positional therapy can be a really, really, really big deal and that a lot of times when  oral appliance therapy fails, what we actually see is that before they got their oral appli -  ance, they had to sleep on their side because if they laid on their back and went into REM  sleep, their airway would obstruct, they'd die, so to speak. Their brain would wake them  up. So they were obligate side sleepers in order to have a patent airway. We give them an  oral appliance, it protects their airway enough for them to then sleep on their back. And  sometimes the AHI doesn't change that much because they were on their side before, now  they're on their back, even with the oral appliance. So positional therapy we know has a  big impact. Well, what about people without obstructive sleep apnea? Is there something  to their sleep position as well? Well, it turns out it looks like there is, but maybe not why  you think, maybe not airway related, maybe it's just comfort related. However, a 2022  study did show that people who slept on their right side seem to wake up less and have  better quality sleep overall. Interesting. Now, this is something you experiment with your -  self. I tend to sleep more on my right side than I do my left side.  [0:08:06]  I spend very little time on my back. I will turn over once or twice. Colonel Philip Neal has a  great presentation on this. This has been done at a few different Spencer Study Club live  events. You can get those videos from past Spencer Study Club live events. Just reach out  if you don't know how to do that, but you can get those videos. And he went into great de -  tail on sleep posture that he teaches people in the military. And really, really important en -  vironment for that because they aren't always in the same sleeping environment. They  may be under a tank, at one point or they may be in a barracks. They may be on a floor in  a hangar. They may be wherever. And so more that he can teach them of like, all right,  you're not always in control over your mattress and pillow, but you are in control of these  things. And he'll walk them through some sleep hygiene stuff that they can do. But then a  lot on position. And he has a whole presentation that he does on that that can make a  huge difference for your patients.  09/01/25   Page   of 3   13

SSC 2.0 - 504: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 2  Reserve Bedroom Only for Sleep and Sex!   [0:09:17]  Another sleep pearl you've probably heard before is the bed and bedroom is for sleep and  sex and that's it. And one thing that... Jenny and I have always been really good about is I  don't think we've ever in our married life had a TV in our bedroom. And if you do, you might  consider getting rid of it, but you might also talk to your patients about this, that if you  watch TV in bed, then you are training your brain that that's what bed is for. Bed is for be -  ing awake. You're awake watching the TV, right? You're watching that show. You are en -  gaged in that content. That is not what you want to teach your brain. You need to teach  yourself that bed is for sleep. And that's what should be triggered when going to sleep. So  some evidence on this. Here's a pilot study on sexual activity and its effect on sleep. And  the pilot study showed that there was significantly improved sleep quality and reduced  wakefulness after sleep onset, also improving sleep efficiency, but they did not see any  statistically significant difference in objective wake-up time, sleep duration, sleep latency,  or subjective sleep measures.  [0:10:36]  And the authors say that possibly that's due to the small sample size. But here's another  thing for you to experiment with or probably you already know if sexual activity helps your  sleep or impairs your sleep. Some people, it may wire them up and it's harder for them to  go to sleep. Others, it makes them immediately go to sleep. So you would know if that is  for you or not. Back to the bedroom in an overall context, though, is the bed, bottom line, is  for sleep and sex. That's going to be the best for your sleep.  Relax!   [0:11:11]  Relaxation before bed. So putting this into your routine can be massively helpful with the  light, limited light exposure and all that kind of stuff. You can also just be winding down. So  some examples of things here that you could do in that relaxation, all sorts of different  things can work for different people. But again, none of this is reading a murder mystery  book or watching TV in bed of a slasher film or something like that. That's not going to be  on our list, but lots of different things you can do here to wind down at the end of the day  and help you relax.  Nice Hot Bath   [0:11:46]  What about taking a nice hot bath before bed? Well, actually there's some evidence that  that will help as well. In this study, they looked at that and found that long bath that did ac -  tually raise your core body temperature a little bit was better than just taking a shower. So  actually increasing your core body temperature and then going to bed and then going to  09/01/25   Page   of 4   13

SSC 2.0 - 504: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 2  bed in that cool environment like we talked about before, that's kind of the very, very best.  Don't think you need to do this on a nightly basis. If you can, great. That'd be pretty awe -  some, I think. But this is also something that can help people with their sleep, and a little  hack that you might use if you are traveling, you're gone to a very distant time zone to  where you're used to, you want to reset those circadian rhythms and stuff like that. This  can be something that you can incorporate into getting a good night's sleep.  No Naps!?   [0:12:40]  What about taking naps? So in general, no naps is what is recommended. But as I've  talked to you about before, in Dr. Walker's book, he talks about the nappuccino, which is  super awesome, which is taking, ingesting some caffeine, taking a 30 minute, 25, 30  minute nap, waking up, with that caffeine hit and that little nap. So the big thing with naps  is not too late in the day. So after about three o'clock or so, and then not too long. So tak -  ing anything longer than 35 minutes or so is probably going to disrupt your sleep and not  be that boost of energy that you would hope it would be. You want it short enough that you  get this little bit of a boost, but not so long that your brain is kind of confused, so to speak,  like, oh, well, nighttime came early today. This is weird, but let's let's do it. You've probably  been there where you've taken a nap in the afternoon at some point in your life, and it was  way longer than you anticipated it being. You just, fell asleep, maybe in a weekend or  something like that. Two and a half hours later, you wake up and you feel super groggy.  And you're like, oh, my gosh, like, I feel like you almost need to sleep longer. But then later  that night, you may have trouble getting to sleep.  [0:14:00]  So a little bit of evidence on this in young, healthy people says frequent napping and late  naps may be associated with increased sleep fragmentation, poor sleep quality, reflected  in longer sleep onsets and increased awakenings. So that's what we just talked about, and  suggesting that healthy younger adults don't need to be taking naps. Frankly, when you  were a healthy young adult, did you ever take a nap? Probably not. That'd be relatively  rare anyway.  Aromatherapy   [0:14:28]  What about aromatherapy? So lavender is well known as an essential oil for sleep. There's  also bergamot and cedarwood. You can put these essential oils on your pillow. You can  massage them into you. You can just smell it. You can do various things with this aro -  matherapy. And this is an article just online that you can check out. Do we have any evi -  dence on this? Well, yeah, we do. So this is a systematic literature review and meta-analy -  sis on aromatherapy. Here's what the authors of that found. The effect of aromatherapy  09/01/25   Page   of 5   13

SSC 2.0 - 504: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 2  improving sleep quality was statistically significant. Whoa! And the results of the subanaly -  sis showed a large effect size on inpatients and elderly people. Why that keeps coming up,  by the way, is elderly people have the hardest time getting a good night's sleep. So this is  why a lot of this research is done in elderly people and hoping to improve their sleep be -  cause a little bit of improvement in sleep can make a big difference in their overall health.  So overall, looking at this systematic literature review, they found that aromatherapy did  improve sleep quality.  Pink Noise!   [0:15:35]  What about pink noise? You may have heard me talk about pink noise before. So pink  noise has been shown to improve deep sleep. And this is something that Jenny is dang  near addicted to. And I told her about this years ago. And so she started using it and really,  really likes it. Where we live in Puerto Rico, there's a dog that I call him our rooster dog  because it seems like every morning when the sun comes up, he starts barking, which as I  mentioned before, is pretty early in Puerto Rico. So that's kind of a bummer. But the pink  noise can't be loud enough to drown him out. And if he's not barking, there is no noise at  all. So with pink noise, right now, I suggest it for people because it will increase deep  sleep. And as you remember, over 40 deep sleep can go away. So getting more deep  sleep as you get older becomes harder. And doing the little things of sleep hygiene to help  you have more deep sleep becomes more important. Examples of pink noise include rain,  ocean waves, waterfall, wind, river, things like that.  [0:16:46]  However, you can get apps for free online. The one I use is Simply Noise, I believe it's  called, and it's free, and it's just pink noise. It's just a wavelength of noise. And the theory  of why this increases deep sleep is that the wavelength of that noise is similar to the wave -  length of delta sleep or deep sleep. However, recently I came across a study that made  me think a little bit different about pink noise, and as mentioned, some studies have shown  deeper sleep, falling asleep faster, stuff like that. But this study in 2022 actually saw that  using pink noise decreased the person's ability to be creative, which I thought was inter -  esting. And the authors don't really go into detail on this, but here's my just kind of swing at  why that might be, is perhaps the increase in deep sleep is at the expense of REM sleep  and stage 2 sleep. Stage 2 sleep and REM sleep are associated with memory consolida -  tion and things like that, and also REM sleep, obviously, is where your brain is kind of de -  fragmenting its hard drive and working out problems and stuff like that. So maybe you are  getting a little bit better deep sleep, and that's helpful with physical repair and stuff like  that, but maybe that is a little bit of the expense of some mental sleep.  [0:18:15]  So here's what I'm doing as of this recording, is my wife and I use pink noise, but we don't  do it every night. So a few nights a week we're using pink noise. If we travel, going into dif -  09/01/25   Page   of 6   13

SSC 2.0 - 504: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 2  ferent time zones, stuff like that, that's when we'll be more likely to use it. If I ever travel  someplace where it's noisy outside, so that I'm in a hotel but in a big city, like you're in New  York or Boston or something like that, then I almost always use pink noise to kind of drown  out that background noise that I'm not used to. It's the noise you aren't used to that will dis -  turb your sleep. So just be aware of this, experiment with it, play with it a little bit, but pay  attention to that. It can help some aspects, but sometimes we've got to be like, alright, so it  helped with something, but did it take that away from something else that was good as  well?  [0:19:12]  So this is the study I'm talking about that found a correlation between pink noise and a de -  crease in this sleep-dependent insight and pattern detection. And as mentioned, the au -  thors are looking at, well, it seems like maybe this was taking away the N1 sleep, which  normally we just think of that as complete, almost just a transition from awake to sleep.  And who cares if it takes away some of the N1 sleep, but this study showed that perhaps  that was the case, that using the pink noise did have an impact on sleep. So this is the  take-home message, is pink noise does impact sleep, these noises. One of the sleep re -  searchers that I've worked with in the past, and he was looking at, and I don't know if this  is coming to fruition or not, but having a sleep tracker paired with a sleep noise generating  machine that would try to bring people into deep sleep, REM sleep, different things using  these different wavelengths of noise, we'll see if that works out or not. But bottom line for  right now, just consider that these noises that can be used during sleep can, not can, but  will have an impact on sleep, and that that is not always 100% positive. That you could be  getting the good, but at the expense of something else.  Pets in the Bedroom?   [0:20:47]  What about having pets in the bedroom? Well, pets can disrupt sleep, and we've got aller -  gies and germs and all that kind of stuff. Dogs will typically kind of get up multiple times  throughout the night, they'll do their little circle thing, and then lay back down. Cats are  semi-nocturnal, so they kind of like to roam around and stuff too. But for you pet lovers,  guess what? So you're not alone. So 56% of adults sleep with a pet in the bedroom. That's  a lot, isn't it? 56%? Give me a break. I think that that's a really high number. And it can ac -  count for people having multiple pets, because if they had multiple pets, that would still just  count as one adult having pets in the bedroom. So that was a shocking statistic for me  when I came across that, that over half of adults have pets in the bedroom. 35% of kids  have a pet in the bedroom. So that all sounds bad, right? Because we believe that having  a pet in the bedroom can disturb your sleep. But if you like the idea of having a pet in the  bedroom, well, guess what?  [0:21:58]  09/01/25   Page   of 7   13

SSC 2.0 - 504: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 2  We can find some research that supports that. So back from that same article from sleep -  foundation.org, research and subjective human experience suggest that sleeping with a  pet can provide a variety of benefits, comfort and security, better emotional health, poten -  tially, heightened immunity. I find that one funny, because that means that you're being ex -  posed to stuff, and so your body's going to respond to that exposure. The other one de -  scribed it as germs and things like that, and allergens, and now it's described as height -  ened immunity. I think that's kind of funny. So this is a variable thing. For some people, this  is probably a pretty bad idea. For other people, it may be a good idea. I'm not going to  judge you if you have the pet in the bedroom or not.  Tomorrow is a New Day!   [0:22:41]  Do you sometimes have a problem with not being able to turn your mind off when you go  to sleep? Well, if that's the case, you're not alone. And this rumination or going over events  of the day, worry about the coming day, things like that, this can really disrupt people's  sleep. So one of the best things you can do there is wrap up the day and maybe think  about, here's a couple things that I'm going to do tomorrow. Journaling can be very effec -  tive for this. Gratitude journals of looking back on your day of things that you're grateful for.  Again, planning for tomorrow, being like, all right, tomorrow I'm going to do this, this, and  this, but I don't need to worry about that now. Now I need a good night's sleep. All of these  things can be cues to your brain. It's like, all right, now it's sleep time. Today is done. To -  morrow's a new day. Let's get a great night's sleep and attack the day tomorrow.  Here Comes the Sun!   [0:23:32]  I talked a little bit before about morning sunlight and red light therapy, and these things  having similar effects on your circadian rhythms and your overall sleep. So in the ideal  world, if you could get up in the morning and go for a nice walk without sunglasses and  have that exposure, that's going to be very positive for your health. I know that most of you  probably can't do that, but someday you could work that into your lifestyle or maybe on the  days that you're not working, you can work that into your lifestyle. That will help your sleep.  SLEEP Hygiene Applies to Kiddos Too!   [0:24:03]  All of these things that we're talking about apply to kiddos and teens as well. Work with  your kids. The big one that you're going to have a struggle with with teenagers is they'll  kind of screw up all of this stuff, actually. So they'll go to bed really, really late. They still  have to get up early for school and sports. They've got their devices right there. They're  09/01/25   Page   of 8   13

SSC 2.0 - 504: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 2  flipping, getting the text messages in the middle of the night, and that will disturb their  sleep because they're used to responding instantaneously. Well, unless it's to you. They  have their phone in their hand 24/7, but when you text them, of course, they never get that  text, right? Because they don't check their text or whatever. Apparently, you have to shoot  them a TikTok video and send it to them that way. You get that I have a little experience  with this? Probably you do too. But bottom line is, look at helping your kids with all of this  sleep hygiene stuff as well. All of this impacts all of us.  Children Needs More Sleep Than Adults!   [0:25:00]  As a reminder, children need more sleep than adults. So your infants, 12 to 16 hours. Tod -  dlers, 11 to 14 hours. Preschool, 10 to 13. School age, 9 to 12. Teenagers, 8 to 10. And in  that school age and teenager area there, that's the kind of the worst case scenario be -  cause they are going to school and maybe in your littles, your 6 to 12 year olds, you can  get them to go to bed at 8 o'clock still and they can get in enough sleep when they're  teens. It's a double whammy because they still need quite a bit of sleep, but they can't go  to sleep at 9 o'clock. Just the way the circadian rhythm works with young adults. So they  tend to be night owls, but then they got to get up really early. So that's a really tough prob -  lem.  Not Getting Enough Sleep?   [0:25:48]  How can you tell if your child or your patient, your kiddo patient isn't getting enough sleep?  Well, all of these different problems can occur. And sometimes I think as dentists involved  in dental sleep medicine, we may miss some of these types of problems. Because if  you're... Well, Hey, does Billy snore? Uh, doesn't have any evidence of bruxism. That's  probably fine. Then we don't only have to... There's no law that says that we can only help  people that have obstructive sleep apnea. So we can help all of our patients sleep better.  Wouldn't it be cool if you did a webinar for your patients or brought them into your office for  a wine and cheese party or something like that and had presentation on sleep hygiene,  just for adults and kids.  [0:26:38]  Maybe you bring in your local ENT doctor. They talk about tonsils, maybe bring in your  sleep doctor. They talk about sleep studies, stuff like that. Wouldn't that be neat? And it's  not all about the obstructive sleep apnea. So when you are seeing things in kids too, and  they're on the ADHD meds, and they have allergies, and they have all these different  things. And then you're like, well, does Billy snore? No. Okay. This? No. That? No. Man,  that doesn't sound like a sleep apnea. Okay. I guess I'll move on. You could still go down  the road of, Hey, let's talk about some sleep hygiene, or better yet, give them something  09/01/25   Page   of 9   13

SSC 2.0 - 504: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 2  that you've prepared in advance and like, hey, maybe nothing going on here at all. But, uh,  if Billy was my kid, I'd be a little concerned about some of that stuff here. Take this thing  that we wrote up, that's on sleep hygiene stuff. I'm sure you've heard about all this stuff be -  fore, but maybe there's a couple of pearls there that you can use and help them with that.  If they contact you and like, hey, wow, we did this and it made a huge difference with him.  That is, that's a win.  Sleep Trackers   [0:27:38]  What about sleep trackers? As you've heard me say before, I'm a big fan. I'm a big fan of  patients using sleep trackers. I use one myself. So that is my Garmin watch on my wrist  there. And here's what it looks like every morning when I wake up. As a matter of fact, this  is typically the first thing I do when I wake up is I check my sleep tracker on my Garmin  watch, and it gives me all sorts of data, more than just these screens that I'm showing  here, but going from here to the other side. So it said my sleep was good. I think the high -  est I've ever, I think maybe one time I got a 100 on that. Maybe. I'm not sure if I've ever  gotten a 100. To be in the 90s is relatively rare. 80s is fairly common. 70s is not rare for  me.  [0:28:33]  And then it goes into detail though. So you'll see the nice sleep histogram here, where it's  marking the REM sleep. So the REM sleep are the higher bars there. The deep sleep are  the lower bars. The N2 sleep is all the rest of it. That little skinny one there is an awaken -  ing. It gives you sleep coach. So there I had like eight hours and 29 minutes of sleep. So  that was a good night's sleep. And it says, hey, you know what? You don't need as much  sleep tonight. You only need seven hours and 20 minutes, which is kind of my normal.  Then going on, it goes into the different stages. Had an hour 19 of deep, 5.53 of light, an  hour 18 of REM sleep, just one minute awake. It's now, as you see there, it says now you  can view your level of breathing variations during sleep. And it will say either few or none is  usually what that says there. Now all of this, by the way, is just from the sensor on my  watch. So if you see the flashy green lights there, that is like a pulse oximeter.  [0:29:34]  So it's using that to gather all of this data that it is then getting heart rate variability and  pulse oximetry, and all of this stuff. And all of the different trackers are using something  similar to that. So it'll then give me my sleep score next. That's, again, the sleep score and  saying that it was continuous. It gives you a little histogram there. This is my sleep score  over that period. So there's the one day. This is over four weeks. This is over an entire  year. And you can see kind of it just varies up and down on that. Also, I get heart rate vari -  ability data. I get workout data. It's telling me what my recovery level is, if my workouts are  being productive or not, if I should take more rest or not, all of these sorts of things. So I'm  a big fan of this stuff. Now, I'm a bit of a data nerd. I love getting data on stuff like this. I  09/01/25   Page   of 10   13

SSC 2.0 - 504: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 2  love things like this. But I think the value of this for your patients is tremendous. And there  are some newer devices now that are very, very inexpensive. So look into that.  [0:30:52]  There was one that I saw recently. Again, this will all change as we publish this and the  years go by. But the one that I'm thinking of was quite inexpensive. And really, you could  possibly buy this for your patients. Maybe you increase the cost of your treatment a couple  $100, which is not going to be the difference between someone saying yes and no. It's just  not. If you're $3200 now and you took it to $3400 to treat someone for their obstructive  sleep apnea, there's not one person that would say yes to $3200 that'll say no at $3400.  That was the deal breaker for them. You could give them a sleep tracker. They start using  that to track their sleep. And here's the goal. The goal is for them to become aware that it's  more than just the plastic. So I know that my sleep varies. I know that there's things that I  can do that help my sleep. I know that the elevation which I'm sleeping at makes a big dif -  ference. When I'm at sea level, I sleep different than when I'm at 5000 feet where I am  here in Utah.  [0:32:00]  All of these things I know make a difference. I know that when I work out makes a differ -  ence. All of that stuff. So if I was your patient and I'm like, yeah, man, I haven't been sleep -  ing well lately. It's probably that oral appliance that you gave me. I would never say that  because I would know that that's just one factor of many factors that I'm looking at. So bot -  tom line, I think you should be using something like this, and you can investigate what  seems to be the best right now for you. I think this is something that as you're using it,  you'll want your patients to use it too. In my opinion, I'd way rather have my patients using  sleep trackers than give them home sleep testing. Home sleep testing is a single night or a  couple nights. And yeah, there's more leads. There's good data there, but it's just a couple  nights. And I know from personal experience of tracking my sleep every night that there is  night-to-night variability with my sleep. And I also know that subjectively, this is the impor -  tant thing, that there's not a direct correlation between how I feel when I wake up and what  this says.  [0:33:09]  Some days I wake up and I'm like, I feel really good, and my watch will say, oh, you didn't  sleep as well as we'd hoped, right? If my watch hopes that I get a good night's sleep, I  hope it does. And some days it'll be like, yeah, your recovery level isn't that great, heads  up. But my watch actually is always giving me the option. If you're feeling worn down,  maybe take that into consideration on your workout. And sometimes I feel awesome, and  I'll go out and be basically dammed to torpedoes full speed ahead and things turn out  okay. And then sometimes I will take that into account. I'm like, you know what, maybe I  am a little bit worn down, I don't want to get sick, I don't want to have a problem here, I'm  going to take the day off, I'm going to recover a little bit here. I love these things, and I  think it's become easier. As I mentioned before, with our eight sleep system now that's built  into our bed, so if I wanted to go back to prior to getting my Garmin watch, I was a bit of a  watch guy.  09/01/25   Page   of 11   13

SSC 2.0 - 504: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 2  [0:34:15]  I have dozens of watches. I would pick up watches all the time as a special... To mark a  special occasion, or if we traveled someplace, I'd get a cool watch. Whenever Jenny and I  traveled someplace, I would be checking out watches at shops and things like that. And  now for probably, geez, going on probably a decade, I have a Garmin watch. This is my  third, I think, Garmin watch that I have, and that's all I wear, and I wear it all the time. So  this is my sleep tracker. You might have an Apple watch that you do. You might have the  Oura Ring like my wife does, stuff like that. But now there's other options. The thing I love  about a wearable is that it's not just my sleep. So my watch is measuring my heart rate  variability all day long, not just when I sleep. So I like that aspect better of a system that is  taking everything into account that you do in a 24-hour period versus just tracking your  sleep. Another plug for the sleep tracker versus a home sleep test that has no idea what  was going on during the day, whereas if you're wearing something every day as a sleep  tracker, you're going to have better stats.  Seek Professional Help!   [0:35:21]  And lastly, if you, your patients, your family members are having a problem with this, seek  professional help. So, cognitive behavioral therapy, we've talked about that in our insomnia  lecture. That can be very, very, very helpful. One kind of example, I sent a patient once to  a psychologist that I worked with, and he would do light therapy. He had these cool glass -  es that the patient would wear, and it helped reset their brain. And I'll never forget, the pa -  tient told me when they came back from that, they said, “until I had that session, I didn't  actually know what it meant to be relaxed. People would tell me to relax. People would tell  me things like that, but I actually had never experienced it. So I didn't know what that  meant.” And the analogy that I've used before on that is if I tell you, “hey, you should go to  SELA.” And that's what I said. “You should go to SELA. It's beautiful. You're going to love  it. Incredible, incredible little city.” So, at least I kind of threw in there at the end that it was  a City, so that narrows it down a little bit.  [0:36:30]  And nowadays, you could probably go to Google or AI or whatever and figure out where  I'm talking about. But let's go back in time a little bit, and more ye olden times where you  weren't accessing the internet for information like that. If you don't know where SELA is,  how are you ever going to get there? You're not. And this is a problem for people. So if  you, like me, are gifted that you do know what it means to relax, that you do know how to  relax, that you know what things you can do that will help you with this, good for you. But if  someone else doesn't know how to do those things, they may need to be taught. And  probably someone who is a professional at teaching people those things is going to be  better than you or I. Although there are lots of valuable resources out there now that are  09/01/25   Page   of 12   13

SSC 2.0 - 504: YOUR Best Sleep! Part 2  very inexpensive or free online resources, cognitive behavioral therapy apps, science on  those apps that they are very, very helpful. So consider using those things as well with  your patients to help them get a good night's sleep.  Recent Research Shows   [0:37:34]  And lastly, research has shown that a good night's sleep improves task performance,  alertness, productivity, better quality of life, enhanced mental health, improves sexual  health, promotes healthy skin, makes us happier, boosts athletic performance, improves  relationships, enhances recovery, helps with weight loss. Do you want any of those things?  Do you want all of those things? Of course you do. So I hope that you've enjoyed your  best sleep and these so-called hacks for you, your family, your friends, all of your patients.  Incorporate as many of these things as you can in your life. Experiment with these things.  Take the things that you learn, pass those on to your loved ones and your patients, and  the ripple effects will go on forever. Take care.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 13   13

