SSC 2.0 - 512: Hypoglossal Nerve Stimulation  SSC 2.0   Level 5  512: Hypoglossal Nerve Stimulation  [intro music]  Approaches to Obstructive Sleep Apnea   [0:00:12]  Hello, and welcome to new-ish approaches to obstructive sleep apnea. I decided to put  this content in the core content section of Spencer Study Club 2.0 because these two  things that I'm about to talk about are being used quite a bit now and are really within the  standards of care for obstructive sleep apnea. With hypoglossal nerve stimulation, Inspire  being around now for multiple years, being used in thousands and thousands of people,  and the GLP-1 agonist being more recently cleared for the use of obstructive sleep apnea,  I don't see that changing anytime soon. So I decided let's put this in the core content. This  is something that we as dentists need to be familiar with because our patients are going to  ask us about it. Frankly, with regard to informed consent, if you're telling people about oth -  er options, you could do that. Now, keep in mind when we are, I always have to kind of  remind us or remind myself that often in this obstructive sleep apnea world that we are  working in, we are playing more of a pharmacist type of role at this point. And so if a physi -  cian has prescribed the oral appliance therapy, then it's not necessarily dependent on us  to be like, well, hey, have you thought about Inspire? Have you thought about orthognathic  surgery? Have you thought about tracheostomy? Not really our job, I don't think. If they've  been prescribed the oral appliance, our job is, are they a candidate for an oral appliance?  Can we treat them with an oral appliance? And then can we provide that oral appliance  therapy? Nevertheless, your patients are going to be asking questions like this, and it'd be  good for you to be conversant with this.  Inspire or Hypoglossal Nerve Stimulation   [0:01:56]  So let's jump in. First, we're going to talk about Inspire or hypoglossal nerve stimulation.  And let me quickly just kind of describe what this is in case you're like, well, I think I under -  stand this. I've heard this taught incorrectly by multiple dentists that teach in the field in  general, where they... So here's how it's taught wrong, and then let me teach it right. So  they have taught that it's an implanted device and that when you have an apnea, it stimu -  lates your tongue to open the airway. Okay. That's wrong. The correct is, and as you see  on this graphic here, this picture, we have an implanted device under the pectoral muscle  there. There is a lead that goes up to the hypoglossal nerve, typically unilaterally. And then  there's a lead that goes to the intercostal muscles.  09/01/25   Page   of 1   10

SSC 2.0 - 512: Hypoglossal Nerve Stimulation  [0:02:50]  The reason the name brand version of this is called “Inspire" is when you inspire, that's  when you have an obstructive event. That's when you change the closing pressure of the  airway, that low pressure system, so to speak. That's when we're going to collapse. So on  inspiration, this lead picks up that there's an inspiration going on. And then this lead will  stimulate the hypoglossal nerve to protrude the tongue. And the surgeon finds those  nerves going to the fibers that protrude the tongue, where obviously there's fibers that will  do other things with your tongue. There's all sorts of things you can do with your tongue.  They want the tongue to be protruded. So that's how it works. So on every inspiration, you  protrude your tongue. Not when there's an apnea, it has no ability to detect if the person's  having an apnea or not. That'd be pretty cool. Maybe that's down the road. But right now,  it's every inspiration your tongue is going to protrude. That's how it works.  [0:03:58]  All right. So I like this graphic that they put in this paper of kind of a flow chart. And it's also  educational to us to see how the physicians who write this up or wrote this up kind of con -  sider the workflow and where our role is in this workflow. So starting at the top, we have  diagnosis of obstructive sleep apnea. If it was below 15 or mild, then they're like, all right,  well, behavioral therapy will be enough. Now, by the way, this paper was written in Japan.  And that may be, I know there's multiple countries, some provinces in Canada don't treat  mild sleep apnea. So they don't pay for treatment is maybe is a better way to say that. So  maybe in Japan, same thing, maybe with their health care system, which I assume is more  of a socialized health care system, maybe same thing. Maybe they're like, well, if it's mild,  then here's the first road. The first thing is lose some weight, physical activity, avoid alco -  hol, sedatives before bedtime, stuff like that. That's what they're going to do. If it is greater  than 15, so if it's moderate or severe, then the current first line therapy, again, these au -  thors putting this here, this is not some guideline for the whole world, but this is the au -  thors' opinions and guidelines here is CPAP. That is, however, pretty universal. This is  what does tend to be done around the world is CPAP is the first line treatment for obstruc -  tive sleep apnea.Then they say, well, if it's successful, yes, then long-term treatment with  follow-ups, you're done. That's it. That's the end of the flowchart. If they are successful  with CPAP, then great, that's it.  Alternative Treatment Options   [0:05:49]  If they aren't successful with CPAP, non-compliant, not using it enough, then we have our  alternative treatment options. And this is where oral appliances comes in, surgeries, drug  therapies, hypoglossal nerve stimulation, those are the four things that they list as the al -  ternative treatment options. Now, kind of nice that we have oral appliances first, if you will.  I mean, it's from left to right anyway. It's first. And however, if you look at this oral appli -  09/01/25   Page   of 2   10

SSC 2.0 - 512: Hypoglossal Nerve Stimulation  ance, what oral appliance is that? You're like, well, I don't know what oral appliance that is.  I don't think I've seen an oral appliance like that before. Well, that's a boil and bite appli -  ance. So that's a boil it in hot water, stick it in your mouth, buy it on Amazon here in the  United States. That to me is a little telling actually, that the authors, the picture that they  chose to put in this is a relatively crappy boil and bite appliance that no dentist that has  education and training like you do would ever use. Because we know the retention is poor  and the compliance is poor and they're bulky and patients aren't going to use them. It's go -  ing to kind of make the tongue go back in the throat because they're so bulky, all that sort  of thing.  [0:07:02]  All right. So again, just kind of little thought process here. And by the way, there are some,  currently anyway, insurance companies in the United States that this happened shortly, but  when you're watching this, who knows, maybe it's come back or maybe it's completely  gone. But there was a period of time that some insurance companies in some states re -  quired oral appliance therapy before they would consider paying for Inspire. They required  it. Now, at first it was kind of like for us dentists like, hey, sweet, that's logical. Why  wouldn't you do a treatment that's $3,000, $4,000, $5,000 instead of one that's tens of  thousands of dollars? If that makes sense. However, they weren't really strict on what that  meant. So there were stories anyway, anecdotes of ear, nose and throat doctors who  wanted to do the Inspire surgery. There would be this hurdle put into their path with the in -  surance company. And so they're like, well, fit them, fit them with an oral appliance. And  they would literally give patients boil and bite appliances. Shockingly, the patients wouldn't  like them that much. And then they would move on to surgery.  [0:08:12]  I think actually that insurance company, I think they also then got lobbied by the ENTs and  that went away just within a few months. That is like you had to do an oral appliance. So,  we'll see what happens down the road. But that is very logical that you would do an oral  appliance before you would do this really expensive therapy. And a quick anecdote on that,  a quick tangent on that. This is probably 2018-ish, 2019, I get invited to a meeting at a  large insurance company in Utah. And we're going to meet with the medical director and  the head dude for sleep at the hospital system. And a couple other people are going to be  there. And they invite me in. They want to talk about increasing our reimbursement for oral  appliance therapy and understanding what else involved and us educating them on what is  it we actually do. Awesome. So I was feeling really good about myself. I'm like in this meet -  ing and they're asking me all these questions. Things going really well. And they're saying,  yeah, we'd like to pay you guys more for this.  [0:09:21]  We think it's really beneficial. I'm like, wow, this is really amazing. And then as we left the  meeting, the medical director was kind of walking next to me. And he's like, “hey, yeah,  thanks, Dr. Spencer, for being here with us and stuff.” It's like, yeah, this Inspire surgery is  really expensive. And this was relatively new. Inspire was pretty new at that point. And he  says, “yeah, this Inspire surgery that people are wanting to do, it's really expensive.” And I  09/01/25   Page   of 3   10

SSC 2.0 - 512: Hypoglossal Nerve Stimulation  realized it's like, okay, this is not anything special about oral appliance therapy or my influ -  ence here locally or anything like that. This is the insurance company wanting to save  money. That's why I was in the room. They are like, whoa, Inspire is a lot. Oral appliance  therapy is way less. Why don't we see if we can do more of that? That was the deal. Now,  to put this in perspective, and if you remember in level two, I talk a little bit about this with  kind of helping you with your dialogue of how you might talk to patients about the financial  investment in their treatment. I've mentioned before how much Inspire costs, or at least  what the EOB, the explanation of benefits, is.  [0:10:45]  Now again, this may have changed a little bit. I don't think it has. So we have an office, a  person that works in our office in Boise, and she had Inspire. Can you remember me talk -  ing about this? So had being the key point there. She doesn't anymore. It's surgical. That  means she had to have it taken out. So she has this put in, and she showed Dr. Kuehne  the explanation of benefits from Blue Cross. And you may remember, it's coming back right  now, it's like, do you remember how much I said the EOB said that Blue Cross was  charged? $180,000. Whoa! That seems like a lot, right? Now what did they pay? That  wasn't on the EOB. That's fascinating to me. So the charge was, it did not say, and we  saved you a bajillion dollars, but just the patient knew that they didn't pay anything. That's  fascinating to me. So there's a little bit of a tangent here. It's almost like the insurance  company wants it to be expensive as far as the patient is concerned, the perception that  it's expensive, because then it looks like they saved them more money. So no wonder that  the insurance companies were thinking, well geez, these oral appliances at two grand,  twenty-five hundred bucks at the time, whatever, that's a bargain compared to $180,000  bill from Inspire.  [0:12:09]  Now again, don't know what the insurance company was paying for that, but they were be -  ing charged a lot. But the word on the street and from talking to physicians that I know in  this field, they said it was about $30,000 - $40,000 is what was paid for Inspire. So, a sig -  nificant amount of money. Now I mentioned, just to finish the story there in case you don't  remember this or didn't hear it at the earlier levels, she did have it removed and then that's  another charge. She didn't like it. You have to turn on Inspire. It only works because you  turned it on. So unlike most surgeries where, like if you have orthognathic surgery, you're  done. Like you don't be like, oh I don't like this. Well, tough because your jaws are in dif -  ferent spot now and we got metal framework in there and that's it. With Inspire, they have  to turn it on every night and if they don't like it, they don't like how that feels, and it has a  ramp system just like CPAP does, stuff like that. So most people can't tolerate it. But this  woman could not tolerate it, didn't like it, so then she had it removed. And I believe that it  was about $15,000 - $20,000 to have it removed.So a lot of expense associated with that.  All right. So back to our flowchart here. Again to take home message there is oral appli -  ances. If other doctors were looking at this, that's their thought process of oral appliance is  a boiling bite thing that you can basically get at Walgreens and that's it. Not what we do.  09/01/25   Page   of 4   10

SSC 2.0 - 512: Hypoglossal Nerve Stimulation  We provide a much higher level of care. They don't know that. Whose job is that to help  them know that? Our job in my opinion.  Pharyngeal Reconstruction Surgeries   [0:13:48]  Next, pharyngeal reconstruction surgeries and that'd be your UPPPs, things like that. Most  ENTs hate doing surgeries like that because they rarely work so they're probably going to  skip that. Drug therapy, we're going to talk about that with the GLP-1s. That's not what  they're talking about in this graphic. They would be talking about weight promoting drugs  and things like that because when this was made, those weren't FDA approved. I don't  think they were used in Japan yet. So then we have down here for hypoglossal nerve  stimulation and these are the criteria.  [0:14:24]  These have changed a little bit. So it used to be BMI less than 30 and now that has  bumped up. So BMI of less than 35. That's pretty high. Go to your BMI chart and figure out  what that means. I think, boy, BMI of 35, that would be, so I'm like 5'10". I think I would  have to be about 230, 240 pounds to be a BMI of 35, maybe even higher than that. So  pretty big, pretty big. Used to be that they would want the person thinner than that, but  they have bumped that up a little bit over the years. AHI greater than 15, so they do need  to be moderate or worse and lack of CPAP compliance. That is what's going to qualify  them, at least in Japan, for hypoglossal nerve stimulation. And that's pretty similar in the  States as well. So then we come down here and outcome evaluation symptom relief, yes.  Then it's long-term follow-up, no, then we throw it up here again down to this. So if any of  these things go into the... That it doesn't work, then it just kind of circles into this. So say -  ing that, well, if they did hypoglossal nerve stimulation and it didn't work or whatever, then  it would come back up here to oral appliance therapy.  HGNS for the Treatment of OSA Studies   [0:15:45]  So here's just a little paper from 2021 that just kind of gives an overview. Just reading from  this, hypoglossal nerve stimulation therapy was approved in 2014 for the treatment of ob -  structive sleep apnea for those who are intolerant of continuous positive airway pressure,  which is reported to be up to 40% to 60% of patients. This therapy works via direct neu -  rostimulation of the hypoglossal nerve in synchrony with respiration. Inspire, we have the  neurostimulation to open the airway via tongue stiffening and protrusion. Hypoglossal  nerve stimulation therapy is a novel neurotherapeutic device that has positively impacted  the way we treat CPAP intolerant patients with obstructive sleep apnea. It's brought forth  new treatment options for a wider range of these patients and has been demonstrated to  09/01/25   Page   of 5   10

SSC 2.0 - 512: Hypoglossal Nerve Stimulation  be both effective and tolerable. So, positive overall, and that gives you the history there.  2014 is when this came about.  HGNS for OSA with Down Syndrome   [0:16:34]  Another paper, this is a literature review published in 2021 on hypoglossal nerve stimula -  tion. So reading from that, hypoglossal nerve stimulation seems to be a novel therapy for  moderate to severe OSA patients who cannot tolerate PAP therapy. HGNS emerges as a  very promising therapy with very good long-term effectiveness and adherence. Okay.  Here's the cool part of this. HGNS is very promising in children with OSA and Down syn -  drome, which is another group of patients in whom PAP adherence is extremely challeng -  ing. So very cool aspect there. So, people with Down syndrome have macroglossia and it's  very difficult also to have someone that may have mental or cognitive deficits to some de -  gree to be on CPAP and they will have sleep apnea when they're young they'll have it all  throughout their life, but very, very, very challenging to put any 12-year-old on CPAP, let  alone somebody with Down syndrome.  [0:17:37]  I told you back in level two as well, as I was going through the appliances, remember me  talking about tongue-retaining devices that really the only people we ever use those on are  people with Down syndrome. And that can work pretty well because we got to get their big  tongue out of the way. And in oral appliance, yes, that brings the base of the tongue be -  cause of the genioglossus there being attached to the genial tubercles. However, it's not  quite as robust, if you will, as that. The original gangster oral appliances included tongue-  retaining devices.  [0:18:13]  When I first joined the then sleep disorders, what was it called? The SDDS, Sleep Disor -  ders Dentistry Society. I think that was it. Yeah. SDDS. I'm pretty sure that was it. It was  changed to the American Academy of Dental Sleep Medicine shortly thereafter. But when I  first joined that group, I remember, and you'll still see the guy that was kind of the guy with  tongue-retaining devices. He was like a big, big rock star because that was a big deal.  You're using tongue-retaining devices. And then later found, well, these mandibular reposi -  tioning appliances seem to do better than tongue-retaining devices. In Down syndrome,  though, it makes all the sense in the world to use a tongue-retaining device. And the hy -  poglossal nerve stimulation makes all the sense in the world too. There's a compliance  component there, so need to turn it on and the patient would need to understand what is  going on and why this feels like this. But the ramp can be set, things like this can be set.  So be aware of this and helpful because, again, all of your patients may not be aware of  this.  [0:19:24]  09/01/25   Page   of 6   10

SSC 2.0 - 512: Hypoglossal Nerve Stimulation  If you have patients have children with Down syndrome, I find that a lot of people with  Down syndrome are not.. you would think it'd be automatic that they would get a diagnosis  of sleep apnea and try to be treated for sleep apnea. And I find that's not the case. Those  same authors though, point out that this is nevertheless an invasive procedure. It's a sur -  gical procedure and not optimal for people that are morbidly obese. So here they put BMI  greater than 32.  [0:19:55]  This study looked at outcomes with hypoglossal nerve stimulation, found them to be statis -  tically significant and found not only was it with the sleep disorder breathing aspects of AHI  and things like that, but also daytime somnolence and quality of life. This study in 2023,  you may recognize one of the authors here of Olivier Vanderveken, who has done a lot of  work in oral appliance therapy, but looking at hypoglossal nerve stimulation versus CPAP  and CPAP being sort of the gold standard here and this is what they look. So to go ahead  and read directly from this, 227 patients who received treatment consecutively, 126 could  be matched one-to-one with regard to age, body mass index, and AHI.  [0:20:37]  After matching, no statistically significant difference between the groups were found. In  other words, hypoglossal nerve stimulation and CPAP were equivalent. A clinically impor -  tant symptom improvement was seen at 12 months in both cohorts, though there was a  greater difference in the Epworth sleepiness scale improvements in patients treated with  hypoglossal nerve stimulation, 8 points, so reduced to eight points versus 3.9 points in the  CPAP group. So pretty big difference in their sleepiness during the day. In both groups,  mean post-treatment AHI was significantly reduced. Hypoglossal nerve stimulation, 8points  down. PAP 6 points down. Now, that is surprising to me. So typically PAP, you're going to  see a massive reduction in AHI. So with PAP, it's almost impossible to have apneas be -  cause you've got a pillar of air blowing your airway open, but nevertheless, in this study,  they showed that hypoglossal nerve stimulation was even a little bit better there. Adher -  ence after 12 months among patients treated with hypoglossal nerve stimulation was  higher than those receiving PAP therapy, but not statistically significant. So the compliance  was similar in both groups, a little bit better with the Inspire device there. Overall effective -  ness calculated with the MDA was 59% in patients treated with hypoglossal nerve stimula -  tion compared to 51% receiving PAP.  [0:22:00]  Now, that last part there is kind of a big deal. So, surgeons think different than medical  doctors. Again, I've explained that 10 different times in our Spencer Study Club content,  but very quickly, you're like, well, surgeons are medical doctors. So when you're in medical  school, you then decide after, am I going to go on the medical road, which is non-surgical?  Am I going to go surgical or non-surgical? So maybe I say it that way. So surgical medical  doctors versus non-surgical medical doctors, they're going to approach things a little bit  different. You are a surgeon. You were trained as a surgeon. Surgeons have very little tol -  erance for failure. Now, this isn't necessarily a failure number that we're seeing here, but  we're seeing that it's not a raving success. It's not 90% of patients are doing awesome on  09/01/25   Page   of 7   10

SSC 2.0 - 512: Hypoglossal Nerve Stimulation  this and keeping it in. As a surgeon, that becomes concerning. So, as you, again, in your  practice, if you were using a dental material, if you're using a new crown or something like  that, and you had 20% of them fail, 30% of them fail, you're going to stop using that. You  just are.  [0:23:20]  You're not going to be able to tolerate that level of not success. So keep this in mind, be -  cause when you're talking to surgeons, in my experience, a lot of surgeons are already  kind of turned off a bit to the hypoglossal nerve stimulation, and they see it as just yet an -  other tool that they have amongst other not very effective tools. They don't have a great  surgery other than orthognathic surgery has been shown to be pretty good, especially in  the short term. So when people are not a candidate for orthognathic surgery, that's like,  well, this is maybe, this is okay. And they would do hypoglossal nerve stimulation seven  days a week versus cutting out the palate, because they know for sure that that is not very  effective and patients hate it, and the outcome is bad, and at least hypoglossal nerve stim -  ulation, in a worst case scenario, they can take it out. So it's reversible. So that's pretty  good. But just I point that out there, then on the other side of the coin, your non-surgical,  your medical side, your pulmonologists in particular, they're used to seeing AHIs of zero.  So any treatment that does not give an AHI of zero, they tend to not like as much as CPAP.  They tend to be fans of CPAP.  [0:24:40]  In the conclusion there, the authors say hypoglossal nerve stimulation therapy had signifi -  cantly greater improvements in daytime sleepiness compared to PAP therapy, and overall  effectiveness were comparable. And that's interesting, isn't it? That the shock in the tongue  would help them be more awake during the day. Not sure why that is. With CPAP, histori -  cally, they were doing full PSGs on people and putting them on CPAP, so they're seeing  arousals, things like that. You could make up a story. It's like, well, maybe it's less jarring to  the patient to have just the shock of the tongue rather than that thing on their face all the  time. And the nice thing with hypoglossal nerve stimulation is it doesn't care if you're laying  on your side, back, stomach. You can roll around. You can move around. You can do  whatever you want, whereas CPAP, that can disturb the sleep as well. However, having  said all that, CPAP's been around a very, very long time, and they've done tons of studies  in full PSGs where they would see if there was something that was disturbing the person's  sleep due to the CPAP. Nevertheless, that's what this study showed, that the hypoglossal  nerve stimulation, the daytime somnolence was better than those on CPAP.  Take Home Message   [0:25:50]  So that's it on hypoglossal nerve stimulation. Really, the take home message is just for you  to be aware of it, know that it is there, know how to talk to your patients about it, and also, I  don't think we're in competition. There are so many people with sleep apnea. I never see  09/01/25   Page   of 8   10

SSC 2.0 - 512: Hypoglossal Nerve Stimulation  any treatment for sleep apnea as competing with what I am doing. That's just not how it  goes. We want all of these things available. Now, having said that, it has been my experi -  ence that sometimes people in those fields do see it as competition. I've seen DME people  that are kind of like, oh, yeah, you're the anti-CPAP guy or something, or the inspire rep.  They don't tend to spend any time with dentists because they see us kind of as competi -  tion to their product, and that's dumb. So what would be better is if you had a relationship  with your local ENTs, and I promise you, if you find out in your area who is doing Inspire  and you introduce yourself to them and be like, hey, and how you do this is what's in it for  them. So you don't call them up and be like, hey, I know that not everybody tolerates In -  spire well and that there's lots of people that aren't good candidates for it, so I want to in -  troduce myself to you so that you can refer patients to me for oral appliance therapy. It's  very self-serving, right?  [0:27:06]  On the other hand, if you call them up and say the exact opposite, hey, I have patients.  They aren't always candidates for oral appliance therapy due to various reasons. Maybe  they don't want to wear something in their mouth. Maybe there's, again, various reasons  that they may not be a candidate or just don't want to do oral appliance therapy. What  should I look for in my patients that would make them good candidates for you? Can you  give me some direction on how to direct people your way for hypoglossal nerve stimula -  tion? And that'll be like, well, yeah, cool. Thank you very much. And they will likely be the  one to be like, well, I get a lot of patients that aren't candidates too. Now, granted, some of  that is because they are super-duper obese. How's oral appliance therapy work in those  cases? And my response to that question would be like, well, not as well as CPAP usually,  but usually we're talking about someone who's already given up on CPAP, so what the  heck?  [0:28:00]  I've treated tons of people that were morbidly obese, and they did fine. But it's, as you  know, doctor, it's anatomy, so there's going to be responders and there's going to be non-  responders. And an ENT is going to be like, oh, yeah, that totally makes sense. Speaking  of that, something I didn't go over here, and it wasn't on that graphic, this isn't always re -  quired, but it's usually done, that they will do a DISE procedure prior to the hypoglossal  nerve stimulation. DISE stands for Drug-Induced Sleep Endoscopy. A DISE procedure,  they bring the patient in, the ear, nose, and throat doctor would bring the patient in to the  OR, they would sedate them, and then with a nasal endoscope, they would look at the  area of collapse of the airway. And what they're looking for is non-concentric collapse. So if  it completely closes concentrically, then they know that's a bad candidate for hypoglossal  nerve stimulation, where if it does seem to be base of the tongue, if they can pull the jaw  forward a little bit, and that opens the airway, then good. Well, who else would probably, or  what other therapy would be good in that same scenario?  [0:29:12]  Oral appliance therapy. So this is a good connection for you to have with that ENT be -  cause it's similar patients that can be helped by these therapies. And the patient may de -  09/01/25   Page   of 9   10

SSC 2.0 - 512: Hypoglossal Nerve Stimulation  cide after they... Like I've heard stories of women going in, being prepped for surgery for  hypoglossal nerve stimulation, and the prep nurse there is wiping off their neck with iodine  or whatever. They're like cleaning their neck, and the patient's like, what are you doing? I  thought the thing like goes here in my chest. And they're like, well, it does, but we have to  make a cut here to get the lead to go up to your tongue. What? Sorry? So you're going to  cut my neck? Will you be able to see it? Yeah, you'll have a little scar there. Okay. I'm out.  Bye. So I've heard stories of this happening, and then that person would presumably be  maybe a good oral appliance candidate. The other thing too, and there's not, I don't know  there's anything written about this yet, but oral appliance therapy in conjunction with hy -  poglossal nerve stimulation makes sense too.  [0:30:18]  It says if you could keep the jaw from falling backwards, then the hypoglossal nerve stimu -  lation wouldn't have to work as hard to get the tongue forward. So if we just held the jaw  from falling backwards, we don't have to protrude the jaw a long ways, but if we just kept it  from going backwards, then perhaps that hypoglossal nerve stimulation would be even  better. And then the other thing too is some people, their teeth are kind of rough or sharp,  and them protruding their tongue over their occlusal surfaces can irritate their tongue. And  there's something that they call a tongue glide, and that is just a lower Night Guard. And  they will sometimes say, hey, go to your dentist and get a tongue glide, and the dentist is  like, I don't know what the flip you're talking about. So if you could have that relationship  where the ear, nose, and throat doctor says, well, go to Dr. Spencer and get a tongue glide  for this, great. And again, you're not going to steal the patient away from the ear, nose, and  throat doctor, but you're going to have this working relationship there that's going to be  very positive. So that'd be my suggestion on hypoglossal nerve stimulation. Again, don't  see it as competition. See it as another treatment. And as we talk about in level five here  with the challenging cases and putting people back on CPAP, this is also part of that dia -  logue of like, well, have you thought about hypoglossal nerve stimulation? Well, what are  you talking about? Well, let me tell you a little bit about it. So, important for us to know  some of these things.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 10   10

