SSC 2.0 - 304: What's Your Game Plan?  SSC 2.0   Level 3  304: What's Your Game Plan?  [intro music]  Typical TMJ Treatment   [0:00:12]  So here's our typical TMJ treatment pretty much throughout the world, and that is to stick  our head in the proverbial sand there as dentists and just to kind of ignore it. And then if  you're a little bit aware of what's going on, then you will fit a night guard. And of course,  when night guards seem to work, we have no idea why they worked. And when they don't  work, we have no idea why they didn't work. And then unfortunately, when that is done by  most dentists and it doesn't work and the patient still has a problem, then they get referred  to an oral surgeon. And sometimes things like total joint replacement are done. It's kind of  the sad state of affairs of this. Even just this weekend, I was speaking at a big conference  in Toronto, had probably 1,000 dentists that I taught, dental professionals I should say, as  I'm sure there were lots of hygienists and staff members and stuff like that there. But a big,  big meeting. And the level of understanding amongst those dentists with the questions that  were asked afterwards, many of the questions were personal. They were themselves.  [0:01:23]  And something I did there, which I have mentioned I've been doing now for a while, is I  had the person with the disc displacement and I asked the crowd, has anybody got a nice  loud click? And I found a woman that did and she was a hygienist. And I did the procedure.  I bring the jaw forward a little bit, got her into centric relation, got her on the disc, captured  the disc. And then afterwards I got back on the stage and I turned back to her and I said,  hey, just curious, did you know that you were clicking on to the disc when you opened wide  like that and it pops? And she said, no, I thought I was clicking off. I thought I was dislocat -  ing, not relocating. And this is a dental professional, okay? So nobody really knows. Our  surgeons know. Never met an oral surgeon who didn't know what a non-reducing disc dis -  placement was. So they get the anatomy. They understand. It's the general dentists that  are the problem, right? Because we try something with a complete lack of understanding  of what's going on. And then when it doesn't work, we refer to the surgeon and surgeons  do surgery.  [0:02:43]  Now, in my experience, if you are building the TMD part of your practice, it's really rare for  there to be surgeons who want to do TMJ surgery. It does exist. I have a member of our  business elite group right now, and she's amazing. She's fantastic. And very close to her,  she has a surgeon that loves doing joint replacement surgeries and things like that. At  least currently he does. And she says he's a good guy. He's not trying to do anything  09 /01/25   Page   of 1   12

SSC 2.0 - 304: What's Your Game Plan?  wrong. He thinks in his heart that this is the right thing to do. What I think will change is as  she sees more and more patients and really the legend of her success spreads, then  eventually he will stop. Because think about that. If you were doing something quite inva -  sive with significant side effects and without necessarily the surety of pain relief, and then  there was someone else who was doing something extremely conservative, very afford -  able, because joint replacements are tens of thousands of dollars out of pocket for the pa -  tient, sometimes in excess of $100,000. If you were in that surgeon's shoes, and you knew  that there was a colleague in town that was doing something very conservative like PRF  and simple splint therapy and getting the vast majority of patients better, you'd stop, right?  [0:04:13]  Because you're an ethical, moral person. Well, that's my experience with surgeons is once  they know that there's someone in their area that they can trust to help these folks, they  then stop doing the surgeries and they refer them over. I've told the story before of the  surgeon here in Utah that was doing quite a bit of surgery with the previous owner of the  practice. And after we took the practice over, I explained to him what we did. And he actu -  ally brought his wife to see Kevin. And fortunately for us, Kevin was able to unlock her and  everything turned out well. And now he won't see a patient for a TMJ problem unless that  patient has already seen us. And it's exceedingly rare that we refer anyone for surgery.  Okay, so we're trying to be better than this. And we're trying to be better than this.  [0:05:02]  The doctors in this Farside cartoon at the bottom there, you see it says horse hospitals.  And we have the poor horses sitting there with their broken legs and a bunch of doctors  walking around with charts and shotguns. And that of course is the joke that what do you  do for a horse with a broken leg? You got to shoot it, right? And actually, you know what?  Speaking of PRF, that is not the case anymore. Not the case, hasn't been the case for a  while with more expensive horses because they spend a lot of money on these horses and  they figured out how to make things heal. But some of the PRF, PRP research, a lot of that  research has come out of the veterinary world where they have looked at how do we help  areas of poor blood flow, which was the limb of a horse and that when they would break  their leg, they didn't have good blood flow in there. And then of course, a horse is a very  big animal, so difficult to allow healing without that weight bearing there. And a lot of this  research has been done there successfully.  What’s Your Game Plan?   [0:06:14]  Okay, so we're going to talk about now, what's your game plan? A lot of times when people  ask me questions about do I do this? Should I do this? What type of splint? What type of  this? My question will be kind of like, well, what's your game plan? What do you want to  do? Because it depends, answer is usually the appropriate answer in those cases. It de -  pends if the person is 12 years old, has popping or clicking and is not yet in ortho. Why  09 /01/25   Page   of 2   12

SSC 2.0 - 304: What's Your Game Plan?  wouldn't you try to bring the jaw into an ideal position versus someone who's 60 years old  and maybe recently had aesthetic work and spent a lot of money on their smile and you  would like to not change their bite, if at all possible. So we have all of these different sce -  narios and knowing your game plan is going to help you. So knowing where you want to  end up is going to help you define your route.  [0:07:21]  Okay, in order to get somewhere, we need to know two things, where we are and where  we want to go. Now with TMJ problems, unfortunately, sometimes both of those things are  not crystal clear because you don't know where you are. In other words, you don't have  the correct diagnosis and you don't necessarily know where you want to go. And here's  what I mean by that, because where you may think you want to go is, well, I want the pa -  tient to have no pain, I don't want them to have pain or dysfunction or whatever.  [0:07:53]  But it's fascinating to me how many dentists will use deprogrammer style appliances. And  even though it's in the name, they won't really think about what does that mean? So a de -  programmer deprograms, that's logical, right? Okay, well, what's the program? Well, the  program is the person's occlusion. That's my program. Okay, that program was pro -  grammed back when I was a teenager by my orthodontist. After he had my general dentist  pull my premolars and then they kind of pulled everything together, right? And I wore the  headgear and I did all the stuff, right, that's supposed to mess me up for the rest of my life,  according to some people. But that's the program. So if I use a deprogrammer on a pro -  gram, what is going to be the new program? Who knows? So when people are doing de -  programmer, I understand why this is popular in dentistry and why it's been taught over the  years. Because frankly, if you change someone's program, that means you've changed  their bite. And now to give them a bite again, because they've been deprogrammed, well,  now that may require lots of crowns. That's cool, right? So now you got $50,000 of den -  tistry to do on this patient.  [0:09:22]  Maybe that requires orthodontics. Nice. I got a $7,000, $8,000 case. But what if you don't  want to do that? What if you don't want to change their bite? What if the patient doesn't  want to change their bite? What if aesthetically, they've got a beautiful smile, they have a  beautiful jawline. There's no reason for us to contemplate changing their bite. Or again,  they've already had their bite changed through adult orthodontics or crowns or whatever.  Wouldn't it be nice to not have to do that if you didn't want to? So that's why when I talk  about deprogrammers, so you're almost never going to hear me or my partners talk about  using a deprogrammer. Because we want a program. Our game plan is to take them to a  certain position and/or keep them in their current position. That's the game plan. Our des -  tination for most of our patients is the same occlusion that they have now, just without pain  or dysfunction. And think about that. If your patient came in and they had no pain, they had  no dysfunction, their TMJ problem, well, let's just say they don't even have a TMJ problem.  But you look at their cone beam CT and you think that their condyle is a little bit too far  back, too far up.  09 /01/25   Page   of 3   12

SSC 2.0 - 304: What's Your Game Plan?  [0:10:38]  Would you treat them? Would you change their entire occlusal scheme to try to fix this po -  tential issue that you see on an x-ray? If they have no pain, no dysfunction, not affecting  their quality of life, they're doing everything great. Everything's cool. Let's say they have  virgin teeth, no less. You got to crown their teeth to go into this position that you think is  better for them? Of course you aren't. Are you going to do braces on them just to take  them to a spot? Are you going to encourage them to do braces? Let's put this in your own  family. You got a family member, you have a 25-year-old daughter, and she's completely  fine and no problems at all, can eat anything she wants to, never has headaches, never  has jaw pain. But then you take this course, you get a cone beam CT on her, and you see  that her condyle is not in a ideal position. Are you going to change everything? Are you go -  ing to suggest maybe orthognathic surgery? Of course not.  [0:11:30]  So your game plan is going to dictate everything here. And for the most part, our game  plan is don't screw up their bite. We all know, or your clinical experience will support, that  it's not so much what they have, their occlusion, it's what they do with what they have. So-  called parafunction. Spending way too much time with their teeth in contact. Way more  than 1%. I believe that most people, not all people, but most people, and when I say most,  I mean more than 99%, we can get them to not have pain, not have dysfunction, improve  quality of life, and not change their bite because we can get them closer to 1% occlusion.  And then, if they're not actively doing things with their bite that may put them in a less than  ideal position, they are likely to do just fine. All right, so that's kind of our initial summary of  what we're going to be heading into here with splint therapy.  [0:12:45]  But when you're thinking this stuff through, in your mind should always be, well, where am  I now? What's my diagnosis? Where am I going? Okay, what's my plan to get from where I  am now? I've got to know that. What's my diagnosis? Where am I going? What's the plan?  What are we hoping to do? And that is going to dictate your plan to a large degree. And  now, you know what is also going to dictate that? It's where you start, right? So if your di -  agnosis is wrong, sometimes you'll figure that out during treatment, and then you have to  change your course. It would just be like if you were out in the woods or something, and  you thought you were somewhere on the map, and then you got to a ridge or something  like that where you could see, and you realize, oh, I'm not where I thought I was. Then you  would create a new plan to get where you want to go. You have to know where you are,  and that diagnosis is the most important thing.  Will There Be Phase II?   [0:13:40]  Okay, so here's some of the questions we're going to ask with our game plan. Will there be  phase two? So phase two is termed anything that is irreversible. Phase two could be equi -  09 /01/25   Page   of 4   12

SSC 2.0 - 304: What's Your Game Plan?  libration. We don't typically necessarily throw equilibration into phase two because it's min -  imally invasive. But technically, since it's difficult to put the enamel back, yeah, that's  phase two as well. So phase one is going to be anything that's considered reversible,  splint therapy, or reversible like PRF, I guess. We would consider reversible in that we're  doing something that if it doesn't work, then it hasn't changed everything for them.  [0:14:28]  Phase two is considered irreversible treatments such as changing the bite. So crowning  the teeth, doing braces, surgery. Those are our phase two type of treatments. So will there  be phase two? Now again, your knee-jerk reaction may be like, well, no, Jamison says  they wean off almost everybody, so why would I ever do phase two? Well, because maybe  you want to do phase two. So Jenny had, well, I don't know that I would call it phase two,  but she had a full math reconstruction because she just never loved her smile, her natural  teeth were a little short, and she just never loved it. And she'd already had a couple dental  implants and had some other issues that we had dealt with over the years and had  restored. And so it just kind of made sense. Oh, and she had a posterior open bite. Throw  that in, right? So she had a posterior open bite because of using an oral appliance and not  really thinking that much about getting her bite back, not worrying about it too much, doing  fine.  [0:15:31]  And so then it's like, oh, shoot, my back teeth don't touch. She didn't really care. Now she  was never symptomatic or anything like that other than the sleep apnea, never had a jaw  problem or any of that kind of stuff. So when we did her full math reconstruction with a  member of Spencer Study Club, Frank Henrich did it for her, and he did a beautiful job,  and we changed her vertical in the back. We closed the space. Logical, right? Why  wouldn't we do that? Now, you remember hearing this in level two, but she still has to use  a morning reprogrammer with the new appliance that she has to get her bite to go back to  that new occlusion. So for her, she's one of those people that has to continually remind  herself to get back to that original bite. Okay, so don't think that either. I hate that thought  process that, oh, we're going to change their bite and it's going to be permanent like that.  Oh, we're going to do surgery and then that's permanent. No, it's not. So learn from what  we've learned with sleep, that if you do orthognathic surgery for crying out loud and move  their jaws forward.  [0:16:36]  Remember that study I shared with you that a little more than eight years later, ten years  later, a huge percentage of those patients had moderate sleep apnea again. Soft tissue  tends to win, right? So anytime that we just kind of change hard tissue, that can be effec -  tive. But with people who get phase two, I've always, and remember, so right at the begin -  ning of my career, that was my mentor's model, was splint therapy to phase two. That's  what he believed. And that's what I did for the first two years, splint therapy to crowns.  That's what I did. And then when we started weaning people off or stuff, but I would then  educate people that, hey, if we do crowns, heads up, one, you're going to have to wear  your night guard for the rest of your life. And all of Dr. Mathis' patients had a night guard.  09 /01/25   Page   of 5   12

SSC 2.0 - 304: What's Your Game Plan?  And every patient that I saw of his that had crowns that came back having a problem, it's  because they stopped wearing their night guard, which was one of the things that made  me start thinking about airway. Because it's like, why? Why is this? Why do they have to  have this ferrous style night guard in order to be successful long term? Well, maybe it's  because he was accidentally treating their airway the whole time.  [0:17:49]  Okay, but bottom line is nowadays, if we have somebody that gets phase two, we tell  them, hey, we're going to do this, or your dentist is going to do this, or orthodontist is going  to do this. But because we're talking about the disc displacement and soft tissues in your  jaw joint, you could bite down on a peanut one day in a salad, and all this starts over  again. Because that would tweak something and you're off the disc again. When people  develop low back pain and have a displaced disc in their back, a protruded disc, stuff like  that, it's not typically some massive major trauma, car accident or getting hit in something  else or jumping from 10 feet out of a building or something and compressing their spine.  It's just normal life. And then they do something like pick up their suitcase. Like I hurt my  back once I was going upstairs at our Salt Lake condo where we do our Business Elite  events. And I had a suitcase in one hand, like as one does, and I was going upstairs and  so just that being off with weight on one side and just that little tweak in my back, boom,  kicked out a disc there, and dang, that was not awesome. And that was not awesome for  quite some time.  [0:19:12]  Point is, just because you do not think, and this is very typical for dentists to think this way,  well, I changed their bite, so now it's going to be great forever. No, no, it's not. They used  to think that, and there's still people that do think that, by the way. And you may have even  come from that group. Just this past weekend, I had somebody come up after my lecture,  and he was a neuromuscular guy and was asking me, hey, do you know about the In -  ternational College of Cranio-Mandibular Orthopedics and stuff? And I'm like, well, a little.  My mentor was one of the main speakers for it 35 years ago. So yeah, I've heard of it. And  he was confused because I was able to do things without the now, I think, $50,000 of  equipment that he has bought that helps him with this. But he was pretty smart, because  he quickly, as soon as I said, well, you do it this way, I do it this way, and he's like, oh,  wow, that's a lot easier and I was like, well, yeah, it is. And we've kind of figured this out  over time. So those theories are still out there, and they will be taught. And I even partici -  pate in some courses that teach that now with sleep, with airway.  [0:20:30]  A guy that I teach with is fond of saying, old bite bad, new bite good. Because they've worn  something that jaws in a different position, that helps their airway. And so now that they  have a posterior open bite, it's like, oh, well, see, your old bite was bad, your new bite is  good. That's a very logical approach unless you put on 1% occlusion onto that. Because  with the idea of 1% occlusion, how much time are they actually spending with their teeth  together? If you agree with that, then why would you be so concerned about where their  jaw is 1% of the day? Remember, 1.3 minutes throughout the night. Does that matter to  09 /01/25   Page   of 6   12

SSC 2.0 - 304: What's Your Game Plan?  you? No. It's the 99%, right? So we would be looking at other things. We'd be looking at,  can we hold the jaw actively at night, like with a sleep appliance, rather than I crown the  teeth? Because if I crown the teeth, I still haven't changed anything unless I can officially  hold their teeth together all night. Yes?  [0:21:30]  All right, so back to phase two. That's the phase two discussion. Will there be phase two?  Again, there are times when there will be phase two. So if you have an adult patient and  they're like Jenny, and they're like, you know what, never been really happy with my smile.  I'd like to do this. And you know it's going to be a full mouth reconstruction, let's say. And  you see that that person has clicking. Why would you not try to put them into a better phys -  iological anatomical position for their jaw joint? You're going to be remodeling their dental  house anyway. Wouldn't you want to make sure the foundation is the best possible? I  would. You're just doing orthodontics on an adult. Same scenario. They have popping and  clicking. And maybe in this scenario, in this theoretical scenario I'm giving you here, they  don't hurt. They don't have pain. They don't have dysfunction. They don't have a quality of  life issue. So they don't have PD or Q. What do they have? They're doing phase two.  Okay, so now it's less about PDQ. It's more about, well, what are they fixing to do? I'm go -  ing to remodel this house. Let's make sure the foundation is strong. Okay, I hope that  makes sense. If it doesn't make sense, go to the Facebook group and make sure you put  in a question there.  [0:22:51]  All right, so then the next bullet point here, has phase two already occurred? Aha, here's  the rub, right? So back early days when I was kind of putting all this stuff together and I  was taught by phase two guys and non-phase two guys, weaners. So holders and wean -  ers, we call those. So the holders are the people that put people into phase two. And I had  some of my best mentors that were dyed in the wool holders. Everybody did splint therapy  and then did crowns or braces or whatever. And then I had some of my main mentors that I  ended up following were guys who would wean people off the splints. But I'm from Boise  and my practice in Boise, that's relatively close to Las Vegas. And we had a lot of dentists  in the Boise area that were LVI trained and LVI was a phase two type of approach.  [0:23:41]  So it was a neuromuscular, so pulse, pulse, pulse, find a different jaw position. When you  pulse the jaw, it always goes to a different jaw position, by the way, which that should  make you wonder. So if it was taking you to the ideal jaw position, wouldn't you think that  at least somebody, it wouldn't change their bite? Well, no, it always changes their bite be -  cause it's a fatigued position. It's not a normal position. Now, I know if you've had that  training, you're going to disagree with that. You're like, no, Jamison, that's not right. But if  you just think about pulsing that muscle over and over and over again, it's going to take it  into a different position. If you don't want to use the word fatigued, fine, but it's going to be  a different position. Dang near always. I've never seen anyone that it wasn't. And so then  they would do crowns on those people and they would do the LVI model was to do crowns  even at that vertical, which never made sense to me for different reasons here, because  09 /01/25   Page   of 7   12

SSC 2.0 - 304: What's Your Game Plan?  they're doing the splint at that vertical, but we want to have some freeway space, but nev -  ermind. I won't go into detail on that right now.  [0:24:46]  But bottom line is people would end up having usually pretty tall teeth. They're open verti -  cal. They're brought forward a little bit. And patients usually be pretty happy. But every  once in a while, you'd have somebody that would then develop a TMJ problem of some  sort after having this done. Because a lot of these people, it was more cosmetic that they  were getting into this. The dentists were treating them for cosmetic problems. If they did  have some sort of low level TMJ problem, they would address that and say, yeah, this is  going to fix it. And oftentimes they would feel better, right? But then they'd be sent to me  because it's like, oh, suck, I've already done $50,000 of crowns on this person and now  they have a TMJ problem. Yikes, my only paradigm is to pulse and change their bite. Well,  I already changed their bite. So now what do I do? So that's why when I talk to people that  are more restorative focus and they kind of dig the idea of I'm going to change stuff, I'm  going to do phase two, I'm going to do this, is it's to go kind of back to my foundation anal -  ogy there.  Is This an Acute or Chronic Problem?   [0:25:50]  If I worked with people that that's all they do is remodel houses, I would still want to teach  them here's how to check the foundation to make sure it's sound. And oh, by the way,  here's a trick to fix the foundation if it's not sound, but you only figure that out after the  house is already remodeled. So you don't have to start over with the remodel or you don't  have to tear the house down and start from scratch. You can fix the foundation and the  house will still be fine. So that's what we do. So we've been able to hone these skills to  wean people off the splints. And that's if they've already had phase two. Okay. Is this an  acute or chronic problem? Acute problems rarely need phase two. Chronic problems may  more likely need this because the person's been dealing with it for so long. Now, not usual -  ly. Again, 99% of the time we're going to wean people off acute or chronic, whatever, but  just keep that in mind.  Wear the Splint Long Term or Short Term?   [0:26:47]  Will the patient need to wear the splint long-term or short-term? More acute problem is  probably going to be short-term. Longer-term use of the splint for more chronic problems.  Does the problem seem to be primarily night-related or day-related? People that wake up  with pain and then the pain gets better through the day, even with meals, that's probably a  nighttime problem. And frankly, probably an airway issue. People on the other hand who  wake up feeling fine and it gets worse throughout the day, that could be a clenching during  09 /01/25   Page   of 8   12

SSC 2.0 - 304: What's Your Game Plan?  the day or teeth together during the day. It could be some of these other things. It could be  medications, remember. That's part of our diagnostic evaluation as well, is are they on any  of those 68 medications that can cause them to clench or grind their teeth? So these are  all some of the questions that you would ask as you are creating your game plan or your  map.  Does the Patient Have Pain When They Chew?   [0:27:40]  Does the patient have pain when they chew? Why we want to know that is you're most  likely going to have them eat with their splint if they have pain when they chew. Fascinat -  ing to me too how many people that will do splint therapy, and it's like, oh yeah, I have the  patient take it out to eat. And they are phase two dentists, so they are planning to put this  person into crowns eventually. But then the patient never tries eating at that same vertical,  at that same jaw position. That makes no sense to me. If you are going to crown the pa -  tient's teeth or move them orthodontically, wouldn't it be nice to give them a little trial peri -  od in that position that you think you're heading to?  [0:28:22]  So as I teach you splint therapy here, we will teach you that everyone is going to phase  two. Now that might surprise you, that statement, because I want you to go into the case  thinking, could I restore that? Would orthodontics be possible here without surgery? Is this  a restorative, is this case restorable without surgery? You're going to think about that with  every case. I don't want you actually to think, oh yeah, but 99% wean off. No, I want you to  think this person's not going to wean off. And then they almost always will wean off. But  you're going to go through the case thinking, what if they can't? I'm planning from the be -  ginning that they can't wean. And then you will never be surprised and in a pickle because  you will have already planned and educated them from the beginning on what might need  to happen.  Has the Patient Worn a Splint in the Past?   [0:29:22]  Has the patient worn a splint in the past? If so, what kinds and what were their outcomes?  This goes back to our history and the patient that's worn different things, stuff like that. You  get a lot of information there. If they've worn deprogrammer type of appliances, if they've  worn an NTI, if they've worn something at night, if they've worn something during the day,  what response they had to that, that'll kind of help guide you too, just because you'll know  how they did and what kind of problems that they had, if any, and what positive things  happened with that. Will a day splint and a separate night guard be needed? Just a day  splint, just a night guard. We'll be showing you that most of the time with a patient with a  TMJ problem, you're going to do a day splint and a night splint or night guard.  09 /01/25   Page   of 9   12

SSC 2.0 - 304: What's Your Game Plan?  [0:30:07]  Now, a lot of times now we are teaching that the night guard could be a sleep appliance.  By the time you watch this, maybe this will already exist, but I'm actively trying to work with  some companies to create a so-called, what I'm going to call, a mandibular stabilization  appliance. So something that just keeps the jaw from falling backwards. It's not intended to  advance the mandible. It's just intended to keep the jaw from falling backwards. A ferrous  style night guard, which we'll talk about more here, has a little ramp on it, but with that  ramp, the only time that ramp is active is if the person has their teeth together. Therefore, if  that person is more of a 1% occluder or towards 1% occlusion, not going to be doing  much, right? Because it's only when their teeth touch. And then it's how they touch in dif -  ferent jaw positions, on their back when they sleep, on their side, whatever. So in some  cases, it might make more sense to use an appliance that's sort of a sleep appliance that  keeps the jaw from falling backwards.  [0:31:07]  Day splint, we need during the day because a lot of their problem is during the day and  that's hopefully when they're using their jaw the most for chewing, speaking, swallowing,  stuff like that is more during the day than it is at night. I mean, even with swallowing, just  even with swallowing our saliva, if you remember from that data from 1969, it's like 10  times per hour when we're sleeping and like 24 times an hour when we are awake. And  that's because we produce so much more saliva when we're awake. So even just that right  there can make a big difference with them wearing something during the day. We only  have, and I'll talk about this later in more detail, but we only have our patients eat with the  splint in if they have pain when they eat. If they don't have pain when they eat, then they  don't eat with it in. If they do have pain when they eat, then they wear it to eat. And then  that's the first thing we do when we wean them off is we start having them go without it to  eat.  Patient Education   [0:32:07]  All right, so let's get into patient education. So let's say you've got your game plan. You got  a pretty good idea of what's going on. And once again, let me give you a little bit of support  here on this is that doesn't mean that you know exactly. Okay, we're doctors. We practice,  right? It's called practice because it's not perfect. We don't know exactly every time. So  you assume you know where you are, okay? You assume you know where you are and  you want to know where you're going and you're going to map out that plan, that route  from where you are to where you're going. And during your journey, you may find out you  are not where you thought you began. You are somewhere else. And then you're going to  need to change things. So with the patient, with doing everything you're doing here, you're  going to say, but this is why we call, this is why we have the word tentative diagnosis, yes?  Is it's tentative. It's this is what we think it is right now based on the current information,  09 /01/25   Page   of 10   12

SSC 2.0 - 304: What's Your Game Plan?  based on everything that I have in front of me. This, I believe, is my diagnosis. Therefore,  I'm going to do this, okay? Dentists as surgeons, we are typically blessed to know what's  going on quickly via x-rays or just visually. We can kind of look and see what's going on.  So diagnosis is not a super big deal in typical restorative dentistry. Where it is here, it's a  much bigger deal. And most of the diagnosis is coming from the patient's history and from  your examination and putting things together.  [0:33:44]  [video playback]  All right. So here's our classic joint videos, and you could use this as part of your patient  education. And I have one of my business lead members, she uses these videos all the  time, and I think that's great. So you can use this. Actually, another of my business lead  members, I thought that was, this was brilliant, is now creating slideshows and going  through like a personalized slideshow with the patient to show them their Cone-beam CT,  comparing that to normal, and then having this slide in there to educate them on the pop -  ping and clicking and relate that to what's going on in their jaw, if it's appropriate. And kind  of making this custom slideshow, I thought that was a really, really smart thing to do. But  I've said in the past that this wasn't for everybody, but now I'm kind of changing my mind  on that.  [0:34:32]  They are... Some people might think this is a little bit gross. So if you kind of put this up on  a screen and someone immediately reacts with kind of like, oh my gosh, that's disgusting,  then cool, move on, don't use that, then you're going to want to use the TMJ demonstrator.  And the TMJ demonstrator in my hands is worth its weight in gold. This business lead  member I was just talking about who uses the videos, she kind of gets frustrated by this  thing and has a difficult time using it. Put in the time, do this with all of your family mem -  bers, show them how this works, show them what's going on in the jaw joint, get comfort -  able with it. It's nice for you to have visual aids to help the patients.  [0:35:11]  So with splint therapy, and of course we went over this with the sleep apnea therapy too,  what you're showing with TMJ demonstrator is you point out to the patient that here's their  teeth together with the way they are now, or it would depend if they have a disc displace -  ment or not. So let's say they have a disc displacement. So teeth together, here's a normal  joint, and up here, normal joint, the disc is in between the condyle and the articular emi -  nence there. It's appropriately placed when the patient opens, the condyle moves down,  the disc stays on place, right? You're showing that with the TMJ demonstrator. Then you  could say, in your case, so how that works is you take out this maxillary piece and you put  in the one with the P on it, which is posterior. So you put that on and that drives the lower  part backwards. So now we have the condyle off the disc, more towards the ear opening,  and you can show the patient, yeah, so in your case, when you bite down, you're off the  disc, and then you open, pop into place, okay? We show the pop into place, and then last -  ly, showing that the splint or the sleep appliance or whatever it is you're using is actually  going to hold their joint into this ideal position, just like over here. We're just doing it with a  09 /01/25   Page   of 11   12

SSC 2.0 - 304: What's Your Game Plan?  splint, and then that patient education part is when you take the splint out, the TMJ  demonstrator will just automatically be in a weird occlusal position.  [0:36:44]  So when you take the splint out, if you don't do anything and it's on the disc, the teeth  won't line up, and if you push the teeth together, then it will pop them back off the disc. So  you can show them, say, hey, at some point we're going to start taking you off the splint  when the pain and dysfunction is better, and then we're going to kind of work with you so  you can get kind of back to your bite, hoping that you spend very little time with your teeth  together because that could kind of start this all over again. Most of our patients will be  able to do that. We call weaning off of the splint therapy. Most of our patients will be able  to do that. Every once in a while, we have somebody who can't do that, and if we can't do  that, then we're going to need to make this jaw position here your new jaw position. And  say, and in your case, that would be done by, and then you could tell, like if they've got a  whole bunch of restorative, then you say in your case, that would probably be done with  crowns because you've got a bunch of teeth and you need crowns anyway, so it'd just be  logical.  [0:37:38]  Or in your case, that'd be done with orthodontics because you have no reason to have  crowns. All of your teeth are perfect. You've never had a filling. You know, then we would  do this with orthodontics so that we don't have to do anything to your teeth, like cutting  down the enamel, okay? Make sure that you are good at this. Trying to explain this without  these tools. You got access to the video, use it. Even if you don't have the TMJ demonstra -  tor, you've got access to the videos. Get the TMJ demonstrator, get good at it, show peo -  ple what is going on. This is really, really, really important so that they understand what  they're getting themselves into and what that ultimate destination might be.  [0:38:21]  As I've said before, everyone is told in our practice that they will likely need phase two,  that this is where we're headed. But we also say, however, a lot of our patients don't. We're  going to try to wean you off, but we can't tell you that you're not the person that's going to  need this additional dentistry. So make sure they know that so that it's not a surprise if six  months or nine months down the road or whatever, they're like, I can't go without this piece  of plastic. Do I got to wear this thing for the rest of my life? Hey, remember when we talked  about that? You are one of the few people that can't wean off the splint. Here's what we  talked about.  [outro music]  09 /01/25   Page   of 12   12

