SSC 2.0 - 201: Dental Sleep Medicine-From Screening to Final Follow up  SSC 2.0   Level 2  201: Dental Sleep Medicine - From  Screening to Final Follow up  [intro music]  Dental Sleep Medicine - From Screening to Final Follow up   [0:00:12]  Welcome to dental sleep medicine from screening to final follow-up. In this session I'm go -  ing to basically give you an overview of everything we do from initial screen to final follow-  up as the title suggests and we'll go through a few things that are kind of important before  we go into exhaustive detail on each step. We'll talk more about fitting of appliances and  follow-up of appliances and adjustment and you know looking at sleep studies and all that  kind of stuff but in this session, in these sessions I should say because it won't just be one  hour here, but in these following sessions we're going to go through step by step talking  about each step and possibly some of the complications that you may have, some of the  considerations that you might need to make, some of the challenges that you might have.  All of Spencer Study Club is about helping you actually implement sleep and TMD in your  practice. It's not just about teaching you stuff. It's not just about you know going over litera -  ture or something like that. It's about helping you actually do this in your practice and for  some of you even helping you get to the point where this is all you do if you choose to.  [0:01:30]  Obviously that's my practice in Boise and Salt Lake are completely limited, have been my  entire career. Many of those with limited practices to dental sleep medicine and TMD are  members of Spencer Study Club. We really have the greatest concentration of specialists  if you will, those who have completely focused their practice on this field. We have the  greatest concentration of any other group. Now most of our members are also members of  the Academy of Dental Sleep Medicine, but within the Academy of Dental Sleep Medicine,  if you take those who have limited practices, the vast majority of them are going to be  members of Spencer Study Club. Why that is, is because we are able to help each other  because we have similar things going on. We have similar challenges, we have similar  questions, we have similar progress that we're making in these fields and we tend to share  it with each other in a spirit of camaraderie and progress rather than a spirit of competition  that you might get other places.  Screening   [0:02:33]  09/01/25   Page   of 1   15

SSC 2.0 - 201: Dental Sleep Medicine-From Screening to Final Follow up  Alright so let's get into this and start off obviously with our screening. So with screening we  have a form that you can get in the library in the document center of Spencer Study Club  and on this form we have at the very top here we have the Epworth Sleepiness Scale. The  Epworth Sleepiness Scale, there are obviously other screening forms that you can use.  The Epworth Sleepiness Scale, you may have heard me before refer to it as the Epworth -  lessness Scale. That's a phrase I got from Dr. Christopher Lettieri who was a sleep doctor  in the military and he called it the Epworthlessness Scale because really the Epworth  Sleepiness Scale is not a sleepiness scale, it's a doziness scale. As the question in the  Epworth Sleepiness Scale states, and let me go ahead and read that word for word here,  how likely are you to doze off or fall asleep in the following situations? How likely you to  doze off or fall asleep? It does not say how likely you to be sleepy. It even clarifies then in  contrast to just feeling tired. What the Epworth Sleepiness Scale is going for is people who  are likely to fall asleep and that is geared towards men. So women will typically score low -  er on the Epworth Sleepiness Scale. Think back when you would visit grandma and  grandpa, who was the one that was asleep in their lazy boy recliner while the other one  was tending to work around the house and get food ready and take care of things and stuff  like that, right?  [0:04:14]  Grandma was always the one that seemed to have enough energy to work and get things  done and even when she sat down in her chair she didn't immediately fall asleep. Grandpa  on the other hand was immediately falling asleep. Men are more likely to doze off or fall  asleep than women are. So having said that, why even give it to people? Well because  Blue Cross wants to know in some cases, which is also kind of stupid frankly because as  we'll talk about in a minute, a lot of times by the time that we're getting involved with insur -  ance, which is not now at the screening point, but if you are going to work with insurance,  the appliance has been prescribed by a physician. We already know that the patient has  sleep apnea. We don't need to be proving anymore that they have sleep apnea. We don't  need to be giving documentation of their problem. Nevertheless, they will still often ask for  that and let me get to why that is. Why that is is because if the patient, and this is not uni -  versal, but for most insurance companies, if the patient, and Medicare as well by the way,  if the patient has mild sleep apnea they need to have something else wrong.  [0:05:27]  They need to have something else having been diagnosed that would then allow them to  have their mild sleep apnea treated. Those things are going to come up next on our form  down here. But back to the Epworth Sleepiness Scale. So we give this to everybody, they  fill it out. And if you go through this and let's say that the person scores a three. By the  way, I think anything below a three, I always question that because speaking from my own  experience, the question number five, lying down to rest in the afternoon when circum -  stances permit, yeah, I can take a nap. You know, unless you've been down in a bunch of  caffeine or something like that, seems like you should be able to take a nap in the after -  noon if you wanted to, right? As circumstances permit. If you had the opportunity to take a  nap, could you fall asleep? I sure can. So I would put a three on that. And I don't think that  09/01/25   Page   of 2   15

SSC 2.0 - 201: Dental Sleep Medicine-From Screening to Final Follow up  that is problematic. I don't think that that is an issue. I think that that's probably healthy.  And so therefore, if I have a patient and they don't put a three on that, I'm like, really, you  can't take a nap in the afternoon?  [0:06:38]  And if they say, no, I really I can't. I just have a problem going to sleep. Well, that could be  a different issue. But if the person, let's say, has a three or four or something like that, and  then you're talking to them and it's all about how tired they are. They just keep coming  back to, I am so fatigued. I am so tired. You know, this is just really affecting my lifestyle.  Then sometimes I'll throw away the form that they filled out and say, would you fill this out  again? But this time, instead of answering the question, how likely you to doze off or fall  asleep in the following situations, answer the question, how likely you to feel tired or  sleepy in the following situations. Now, I literally just went against how this thing was writ -  ten because it says, as opposed to just, "just feeling tired." But I don't care because I'm  using this in our practice as an objective measure of how are they doing. I actually want a  sleepiness scale. I actually want a tiredness scale. I want a fatigue scale.  [0:07:43]  Because the patients that we are going to tend to treat are going to be younger and  healthier. And they're not going to be the fat old men that all of this stuff was built on. The  foundation of sleep apnea is built on fat old men. And as we are not treating fat old men all  the time, we do treat some, right? But as that's not the focus of what we're doing, we're  going to use the tools because we kind of have to, but they aren't great tools. These tools  were not developed for the people that we are seeing on a regular basis in our practices.  All right. So they fill out that on the something wrong categories there with insurance, an  Epworth Sleepiness Scale score of 11 or higher is considered Excessive Daytime Sleepi -  ness or Excessive Daytime Somnolence. So EDS, those are referred to 11 or higher, 10?  No, doesn't work. 11 or higher than that would count as Excessive Daytime Sleepiness or  Somnolence. Now the next questions on here are part of those questions that sometimes  insurance will ask. So we have impaired cognition, difficulty concentrating, mood disor -  ders, depression that would need to have been diagnosed by a medical doctor, hyperten -  sion, ischemic heart disease, history of stroke.  [0:08:58]  So those are the six plus Excessive Daytime Sleepiness. So there's seven things there  that you can look for if the patient has mild sleep apnea that you might need to document.  Now, once again, this is kind of dumb. This would be like going to the pharmacy to get a  prescription filled and the pharmacy has to ask you a bunch of questions in order to get  the drug paid for that your doctor already prescribed. But that's literally what's going on  here is sometimes the insurance company is going to ask us of all people questions about  these things. And so if you have it clearly documented there, then that's going to make life  easier. So normally the patient will have done an Epworth Sleepiness Scale, and that may  be in their documentation already, and you could just use that if you wanted. But just in  case they haven't, that's why we've developed these forms over the years to make sure  that we have the documentation that we might need in order to actually get paid. Next on  09/01/25   Page   of 3   15

SSC 2.0 - 201: Dental Sleep Medicine-From Screening to Final Follow up  the list here is sleep apnea. And if yes, did you try to use CPAP? So the idea behind this  screening form is that you're giving this to everybody.  [0:10:04]  This isn't just somebody you suspect has sleep apnea. You could do it that way if you  wanted, but I encourage you to give this to everyone, and I'll explain why that will make  sense here in just a minute. But that's the idea behind this form is it's not just purely on, I  think you have sleep apnea. It's more broad in, let's give this to everybody. And so obvi -  ously in this question, if they've already been diagnosed with sleep apnea, that's some of  that low-hanging fruit of, oh, well, have you ever heard of oral appliance therapy? Because  you'll have patients that will fill this out. Yes, I've been diagnosed. Yes, I trade CPAP. I  couldn't tolerate CPAP. Why do you ask? And they've never been told that an oral appli -  ance is an option. Or if they were told that oral appliance is an option, they may have been  told some pretty negative stuff about it.  [0:10:52]  There's just a Facebook post today. You could go back and look for this. Robert Finkel,  who's been a member of Spencer Study Club since the beginning and is now actually re -  tired, but maintains his membership in Spencer Study Club because he likes mentoring  younger dentists, said that he had to go in and get kind of a specialized CPAP machine,  more of a ventilatory PAP, for a problem that he is dealing with and he said, you won't be -  lieve the things that the people told me about oral appliance therapy and the things that  they believed, right? So these were the physician's assistants or nurse practitioners that  he was working with, and they believed that oral appliances were going to cause terrible  jaw problems, all sorts of bite changes, TMJ issues, all sorts of stuff. And he got the oppor -  tunity to educate those folks on, well, did you know that's not actually true? And of course,  they didn't know that was true, that that's just what they had thought. So it's very common  for you to have patient seven nowadays, that they have tried CPAP and they never heard  that there were any other options out there. So that's why that question's on there. TMJ  problems significant enough to require treatment. That is written exactly like that on pur -  pose, because if somebody marks yes, then that means that they have or have had in the  past a TMJ problem that they actually had to have treatment for. If you just say do you  have a TMJ problem, then the person could be like, yeah, my jaw clicked in1994, though  therefore I have a TMJ problem.  [0:12:24]  Why that is on here is because there are some insurance companies that will have their  person or nowadays AI look through this looking for reasons not to pay. And a TMJ prob -  lem would be a reason not to pay. So if somebody checked that, we would then write out in  the margin, patient is currently stable, patient is not currently under TMJ care, his condition  is stable. We would make a note so that if anyone or anything did look for that, that they  would see, oh, okay, this person doesn't really have a TMJ problem. Now you may be kind  of confused on that because in level one, I go over parafunction and protective function  and all sorts of stuff like this. And you and I know that there's a connection between TMJ  problems and airway issues. And you and I know that if we treat airway issues that often -  09/01/25   Page   of 4   15

SSC 2.0 - 201: Dental Sleep Medicine-From Screening to Final Follow up  times TMJ problems get better. You and I know that FDA doesn't know that. So when they  put together their special controls back in 2004 or whatever it was, the people that were  putting those together, the special controls for oral appliances for sleep apnea, I'm sure  they're doing the best they could and their education in TMJ problems is exactly the same  as your education in TMJ problems prior to now.  [0:13:41]  Which is very little. And so they said, well, yeah we can't have people with TMJ problems  using oral appliances to pull your jaw forward. That's going to hurt their jaw, right? Pretty  logical. So they put that into the codification of oral appliance therapy for sleep apnea,  therefore that's the way it's written. So every oral appliance on the market, if you actually  looked at the insert that they have to have for that to be FDA approved or FDA cleared, it's  going to say in there that it's contraindicated for someone who has a TMJ problem, it's  contraindicated for somebody who has a periodontal problem, okay? So be careful be -  cause if in your normal dental forms you have do you have TMJ or do you have a TMJ  problem and they mark yes and there's no comment on that at all and you have to submit  that paperwork to an insurance company, let's say, they or again AI will look for that as a  reason to not pay, okay? And then you'll have to then explain later.  [0:14:42]  So always better to make a note right at the time that they're filling that out of like, hey, pa -  tient's stable now, they're doing fine this is something that happened in the past. Gastric  reflux, GERD or heartburn, okay, are you aware of or have you been told that you snore on  a regular basis, that you feel tired or fatigued on a regular basis? Again, this kind of  matches the tired or fatigued up with the upward sleepiness scale because if they mark  yes on that but their sleepiness scale score was very low, then you're going to ask those  questions again with tiredness, fatigue, sleepiness versus dozing off. Clenching or grinding  your teeth, having frequent headaches, neck size being greater than 17 inches or greater  than 16 inches, anyone in your family having sleep apnea, stopping breathing when sleep -  ing slash awakening with a gasp. Those questions are again things that could apply to  anybody in your practice. These are more people that haven't been diagnosed yet, so  we're doing some screening questions of things that are going to be very common in peo -  ple with an airway disorder such as snoring, the most common snoring, witnessed apneas.  So do you snore?  [0:15:52]  Has anyone ever noticed that you stopped breathing when you sleep? The other things on  there are big necks and other things like that are higher risk obviously for sleep apnea.  Then at the bottom we have children, questions for children filled out by their parents obvi -  ously, snoring, noisy breathing, grinding their teeth, wetting the bed, difficulty in school, be -  ing treated for ADD, ADHD, breathing primarily through their mouth, frequent nightmares  or night terrors, and having frequent earaches. Those would obviously be filled out by the  parent and then you can talk about that. At the bottom of the form we have things to re -  mind us to look for evidence of bruxism, scalping of the tongue, crowded airway, tori or  bone loss, anterior wear, retrognathia, class II, particularly class II div 2 bite. So that's our  09/01/25   Page   of 5   15

SSC 2.0 - 201: Dental Sleep Medicine-From Screening to Final Follow up  screening form. And again, I encourage you to give this to everyone that walks in your  practice. And you don't have to do that necessarily every six months, right? So if they fill  this out and it's in your records, you could refer to it afterwards. You could refer to it six  months from now when you see them again or a year from now when you see them again  and say, hey, you filled out this sleep screening questionnaire last time you were in here.  [0:17:08]  Anything changed? Any problems with sleepiness? Have you started snoring? Anything  like that? No, you're still doing good. Great. People that mark all no on here, nose and low  chance of dozing and stuff like that, you can say or your staff, your hygienist, whoever's  going to do this in your office could say, hey, thank you so much for filling this out. Doesn't  look like you are having any problem. And then you'll explain what I'm going to say in a  second of why you're even doing this. When you recognize them or thank them for filling it  out, you will often get a response of, well, you're talking to the wrong person. You should  have my husband fill this out, okay? Or I should fill this out for my husband because he's  got all this stuff. Or I don't have a problem with this, but going through this makes me think  of my dad makes me think of my mom. Is it possible that they could have this problem? So  don't just ignore it. So if they fill it out and it's all nos, like literally it was all nos and they  end up with a zero, that'd be rare.  [0:18:12]  But let's just say that that occurs. Don't just have your staff look at it and go, okay, nothing  here and then put it away. Say why you did that. So we use our screening form and then  we are looking for the different things in the mouth. And again, of course, these are all  things that you see on a daily basis. Okay, any of the above. And you can have people  with sleep apnea that have none of the above. But you're just looking for these intraoral  indicators that could mean a higher chance of having sleep apnea. You're still going to do  this even with your patients that are already diagnosed, which, again, may seem silly. But  the reason you're doing this form in people that have already been diagnosed is to get  some of that information in your records that Blue Cross might ask you for when they're  trying not to pay for treatment.  Explain How Sleep Relates To Dentistry   [0:19:08]  So as part of the screening process, we need to explain how sleep relates to dentistry. And  there's various ways of doing this. Like there's different posters. We've had these posters  and stuff in our office for years. Actually, I don't think we have any of those. If you've been  to our practice in Salt Lake, perhaps for one of the courses that we do at our Salt Lake  practice, I don't think you would have seen these posters. I believe we do still have them,  and we've got them framed really nice and stuff in our Boise office. But I don't think you  need any of that stuff anymore. I think the days of kind of a poster on the wall in a doctor's  office are coming to an end, and it's not as relevant anymore. So what I would do nowa -  09/01/25   Page   of 6   15

SSC 2.0 - 201: Dental Sleep Medicine-From Screening to Final Follow up  days is I would have something that you printed out from the Internet and something that  is relatively new, an article about sleep apnea and dentistry or about bruxism and sleep  apnea or how sleep apnea can affect various problems. That's going to be more powerful  and relevant to your patient. Like, hey, yeah, I saw this article the other day. Or, hey, here's  this thing on how grinding your teeth can be related to sleep apnea, believe it or not. And  one of the big ways to relate this to dentistry is this. Now, I've mentioned this in Level 1,  but I'm going to go into a little bit more detail on this.  [0:20:32]  But before I go into the details, let me just reinforce something I covered in Level 1, which  is in the connecting it with dentistry, the connection is basically the American Dental Asso -  ciation. So this is it. This is how you say it. You may be wondering, patient, why we asked  you questions about sleep apnea, snoring, things like that today. Well, in 2017, the Ameri -  can Dental Association asked all dentists to start screening our patients for what are called  sleep-related breathing disorders, things like sleep apnea. You may not really be aware of  this, but for many, many years, dentists have screened for head and neck cancers. We do  this every time. We do an exam on you. We don't make a big deal about it. But those times  that we've kind of looked on the sides of your tongue or looked down your throat or palpat -  ed around on your face, that's what we were doing. We were doing a head and neck can -  cer screening. Now, we don't treat head and neck cancer, obviously, but the reason we do  those screenings is because there's things that we can pick up as a dentist early, and if we  pick up on those things, it could literally save your life.  [0:21:50]  Since 2017, we've been screening for sleep-related breathing disorders, and why we've  been asked to do this is because there's things we can pick up on early, and if we do, it  could literally save your life. Okay, you see what I did there? So I am making it that the  ADA has asked us to, and then I'm correlating it with cancer. So most of your patients are  not going to blow off cancer. They're not like, ah, cancer, who cares, right? If you saw, and  also for your follow-up, by the way, this should be treated the same way. Because if you  have a patient that has a suspicious lesion on the side of their tongue, you're probably not  going to be just like, oh here's a referral to an oral surgeon, and if you get around to it, go  ahead and give them a call. No, you're going to be like, hey, I need you to get this in, this  is super serious. And probably a week later, you're going to check. Hey, Marcia, did Jami -  son go and see the oral surgeon yet? Right? And it's like, I don't know, let me check in on  that.  [0:22:48]  Now, this is partly due to the fact that you don't see people with suspicious lesions on the  side of their tongue every day in your practice, do you? Hopefully not. Well, sleep apnea  you're going to see a lot more, that's for darn sure. But the impact, the potential impact is  still there, similar to cancer, right? This is a life-threatening problem. And frequently I will  get Spencer study club members who will tell stories of thinking that someone that they  knew had sleep apnea, not acting on that initial thought, and then that person dying before  they had a chance to. So connect it to the American Dental Association has asked us to do  09/01/25   Page   of 7   15

SSC 2.0 - 201: Dental Sleep Medicine-From Screening to Final Follow up  this, just like we do head and neck cancer screenings. That's really all you should need to  do. After you say that, the patient should be like, well, that makes sense. Okay, and they  shouldn't give you any hassle anymore of like, why are you asking me weird questions  like, do I snore? You're just selling me these sleep appliances or whatever, right? No,  you're doing it because this is part of our role. Okay, so I won't read every word of this. I'm  going to go down to these bullet points a little bit. But first couple paragraphs just talking  about what sleep-related breathing disorders are and how we can play an essential role.  Again, familiarize yourself with this because this language from the ADA is telling us den -  tists why we should be involved in this.  Dentist’s Role in Treatment of Sleep-Related Breathing Disorder   [0:24:09]  Okay, now, dentist's role in treatment of sleep-related breathing includes the following.  Again, I'm not going to read every word, but I want to point out a couple things here that  are rather important. Dentists are encouraged to screen patients as part of a comprehen -  sive medical and dental history, asking them questions like we just went over. Okay, so  first, encourage a screen. We should refer as needed to appropriate physicians for proper  diagnosis. We're going to talk more about that in a moment because notice right there did  not say we need to refer to a sleep doctor. It just said appropriate physicians. In children,  screening through history and clinical examination may identify signs and symptoms of de -  ficient growth and development. Other risk factors may lead to airway issues. If risk for  sleep-related breathing disorders is determined, intervention through medical/dental refer -  ral or evidence-based treatment may be appropriate to help treat the sleep-related breath -  ing disorder and or development or and or develop an optimal physiological airway and  breathing pattern.  [0:25:05]  Huh. So what that is saying there is in kiddos, you might treat them to try to help them de -  velop, as it says here, an optimal physiologic airway and breathing pattern. Okay? As in  nasal breathing and things like that. That's not telling you that you have to refer the kiddo  to get a sleep study now we will go over who you would and who you wouldn't and that's  also in level 1, right? And talk a lot about with the kiddos there and then of course Spencer  Study Club is frankly more focused on adults so for the kiddos I have Spencer Study Club  members Mitchell and Tracy and Stacy that put together ASAP Pathway and I'll have in  level 2 here a presentation by Mitchell going over what you should do specifically in kid -  dos. Which is keep this in mind, that according to the American Dental Association your job  with kiddos is not just screen and refer your job with kiddos is to perhaps intervene and  help them develop a proper airway and breathing pattern. That's very different, isn't it?  [0:26:20]  Okay, next, oral appliance therapy is appropriate treatment for mild to moderate sleep ap -  nea and severe sleep apnea when CPAP is not tolerated by the patient. Great, cool, we're  09/01/25   Page   of 8   15

SSC 2.0 - 201: Dental Sleep Medicine-From Screening to Final Follow up  good with that. Fourth bullet point, when oral appliance therapy is prescribed by a physi -  cian through written or electronic order for an adult patient with obstructive sleep apnea, a  dentist should evaluate the patient for the appropriateness of fabricating a suitable oral  appliance. If deemed appropriate, a dentist should fabricate an oral appliance. All right,  let's break that down a little bit. Okay, so it says oral appliance therapy needs to be pre -  scribed by a physician. Now note who though? For an adult patient with obstructive sleep  apnea, okay? So there sometimes will be debates and discussions about do I need a pre -  scription to fit somebody with an oral appliance? Well, in my opinion, it depends. What  does it depend on? So has that patient been diagnosed with sleep apnea? Are you treat -  ing them for their sleep apnea? And frankly, another reason that these kind of rules come  to play is are you going to build their insurance? Okay, all of those things have to be taken  into account. Having said that, since the American Dental Association says you need a  prescription if the patient's been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea, if I were you, I  would do that.  [0:27:39]  Okay, and just to protect yourself, right? You don't ever want to end up anywhere and  someone pulls out this stuff and be like, hey, doctor, did you know that the American Den -  tal Association says you need a prescription from a medical doctor to treat someone with  an oral appliance for their diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea? And you're like, oh, I didn't  know that. Okay, or you would be like now, yeah, I did know that. So I would get a pre -  scription if I were you if they have obstructive sleep apnea. But on the other hand, what  about the patients you're going to see in your practice that have not been diagnosed with  obstructive sleep apnea? Could you fit them with an oral appliance? Well, sure. Because  what are you treating? I don't know what you're treating. You're probably going to put in  your notes that you're treating their bruxism, so to speak. We don't treat bruxism, right?  We just protect the teeth. So you're using a mandibular stabilization appliance in that case  to try to protect the teeth from their believed, presumed bruxism. You're not treating ob -  structive sleep apnea. So you could fit them with an oral appliance and then maybe put  them down this road of diagnosis and screening referral to the physician and all that kind  of stuff  [0:28:49]  And then maybe later we find out that they have obstructive sleep apnea. And then we get  a prescription for the treatment of their obstructive sleep apnea with a custom oral appli -  ance. And then you could build that out to Blue Cross if you wanted to. You follow me? So  the prescription is necessary if we know the person has obstructive sleep apnea. And  note, once again, it does not say, when oral appliance therapy is prescribed by a physi -  cian, it does not say prescribed by sleep physician. So their primary care doctor could be  the one that you make a phone call to and say, hey, doc, common patient Jamison was in  here the other day. I don't know if you knew this or not, but he tried to use CPAP and  couldn't stand it, hasn't used it for years. I talked to him that that there's been improve -  ments in CPAP and stuff like that. He's not interested, not going back on it. Also, he's  wearing down his teeth like crazy. So we're going to fit him with a night guard to protect his  09/01/25   Page   of 9   15

SSC 2.0 - 201: Dental Sleep Medicine-From Screening to Final Follow up  teeth. But I was thinking what we could do, maybe kill two birds with one stone here, treat  him with an oral appliance that keeps his jaw from falling backwards.  [0:29:53]  Maybe that'll help with his sleep apnea. We'll for sure protect his teeth. What do you think  about that, doc? MD, primary care doctor says, sounds good to me. Hey, the American  Dental Association has asked all of us dentists when we're working collaboratively with our  physician colleagues on stuff like this to get a prescription for that oral appliance because  we know this patient has sleep apnea. Could you do me a huge favor? Just scribble out on  our expat or whatever is convenient for you, oral appliance for treatment of patients' sleep  apnea, and then I will be in the clear, if that's okay with you. Okay, I've never had a doctor  say no to that. If they do ever say no to that, then it's always with a, well, I'd really like him  to try CPAP a little harder. Cool, man. Let me talk to him. I'll get him back to you. You do  whatever you can do to get him to use CPAP. That'd be awesome if he could use CPAP.  That's fantastic. If he can't, then we'll be there for him with your appliance .  [0:30:49]  Okay, don't fight the battle. Don't be like, well, he already said he's not going to use CPAP  or whatever. Build the relationship. That relationship with that physician is worth its weight  in gold. As I'll talk more about in level four of Spencer Study Club, any primary care doctor  could refer you patients every single day. Literally every single day of their practice, they're  seeing people with sleep apnea who are not being treated or who have tried treatment and  were not successful with it. Okay, so that's the prescription thing, but don't freak out too  much here because it's not saying that you need a prescription every time you do an ap -  pliance that's top and bottom and connected in some way. It's you need a prescription from  a physician if the patient has been diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea. By the way,  since Spencer Study Club is not only for Americans, this may completely not apply to you  in your country. There are most countries in the world you do not need to work with a  physician at all in treatment of sleep apnea. If that's where you live, cool.  [0:31:51]  I like working with physicians even in those circumstances. If you're in Brazil or you're in  Iceland or you're somewhere in Europe, I would still encourage you to work with physi -  cians because, again, they're going to have patients to refer to you. But as far as your laws  requiring it, that may not be the case. All right, next bullet point. Dentists should obtain ap -  propriate patient consent for treatment that reviews the proposed treatment plan, all avail -  able options, any potential side effects of using OAT and expected appliance longevity.  Cool. No problem on that. And I will talk to you a little bit more about kind of some of the  dialogue that you can use with patients that is both informed consenting them, so to  speak, as well as helping them understand the value of oral appliance therapy because  what you want to connect this to, like it says right there that you're supposed to give them  the other options. Now, most of these people will be familiar with CPAP, and that's kind of  out the window. So the other options typically are what? Surgical, right? And so you can  talk to them about, well, hey the other options may include Inspire, and that's where they  09/01/25   Page   of 10   15

SSC 2.0 - 201: Dental Sleep Medicine-From Screening to Final Follow up  do the surgical thing in your chest, and there's a wire that goes to your tongue, and it  shocks your tongue every time you breathe in.  [0:33:11]  That's why it's called Inspire. That’s $100,000 to $180,000. There's the orthognathic  surgery that break your face and move your face forward and put in plates and stuff. That  can be very effective, sometimes not covered by insurance. That's $30,000 to $100,000.  Our treatment, on the other hand, is more similar to like orthodontics. We need to see you  back multiple times, long-term follow-up. Your success will be based on the long-term fol -  low-up that we provide for you because you're also going to get floppier as you get older,  unfortunately. It's just the way life works. And we'll need to modify your treatment over  time. The good news is, in our office here, the fees are not quite as much as orthodontic  therapy. That's a quick dialogue of how you do that. So you are both taking care of this bul -  let point and throwing out some big old numbers there that the patient's like, whoa,  $100,000, $150,000, $7,000 for braces.  [0:34:05]  Now, all of a sudden, your fee for oral appliance therapy seems way more reasonable,  right? Because if you don't do that kind of stuff, when they walk in, they have no clue how  much this stuff should cost. All right, next. Dentists treating sleep-related breathing disor -  ders or other teeth should be capable of recognizing and managing the potential side ef -  fects through treatment or proper referral. Yep. So that means knowing TMJ stuff, things  like that. This next one is slightly controversial. Dentists who provide oral appliance thera -  py to patients should monitor and adjust the oral appliance for treatment efficacy as need -  ed, or at least annually. As titration of oral appliances has been shown to affect the final  treatment outcome and overall OA success, the use of unattended cardiorespiratory type 3  or type 4 portable monitors may be used by the dentist to help define the optimal target  position of the mandible. A dentist trained in the use of these portable monitor devices may  assess the objective interim results for the purposes of oral appliance titration. All right, so  this is the American Dental Association saying, hey, if you want to do home sleep testing  as part of titration of your oral appliance therapy, go for it.  [0:35:08]  Okay, you got our blessing. Now, about when this was written, like I think, I swear it is like  the same year that this was written, the American Academy of Sleep Medicine actually  came out with a document that said that dentists should never use home sleep testing,  ever. Not qualified to, clearly not smart enough to read these reports that come out of it. I  mean, they didn't technically say that, but they implied it. And that was kind of not cool. So  you had the American Academy of Sleep Medicine saying, no way, dentists should never  touch these things. You had the American Dental Association saying, yeah, go for it. At the  same time, you had certain states, and I swear that as the date of me recording this in  2025, that in New Jersey, I think you're still not allowed to have home sleep testing moni -  toring as a dentist. Georgia at the time was also that way, but now that's reversed. So the  only state that I'm aware of as I record this that it is against the rules, so to speak, is New  Jersey, which is, again, weird because the American Dental Association says you can, and  09/01/25   Page   of 11   15

SSC 2.0 - 201: Dental Sleep Medicine-From Screening to Final Follow up  it's relatively rare for boards of dentistry to go against what the ADA says, but in this case,  they have.  [0:36:20]  But everywhere else, you're fine. Now having said that, and I'll talk about this more as we  go through these sessions, but I don't think you need it anyway, especially now. So back in  the olden days, I had four or five HST units. Back before that, we had pulse oximeters that  we would send out with people. That's just the way we did it, right? That's how we were  taught, and it's a waste of time. So we'll talk about more of why I think that is a waste of  time and your money and why I think there are tools that you can use today that are far  cheaper and easier for patients to use and why, in my opinion, I get the patient back to  their doctor to do a follow-up HST or in-lab study. That is ideal, and by the way, they get  paid for it. So it's going to be covered by insurance if it's done by their primary care doctor  or the sleep doctor. It's never going to be covered if I do it. So I just let them do that rather  than me doing it. So at my Boise and Salt Lake practice, we don't even have home sleep  testing equipment anymore.  [0:37:18]  But this bullet point, if you feel really compelled to do that, and there may be logical rea -  sons for you to do that, like if you're a beginner, maybe you want to be comfortable that  you're sending this patient back and they're doing relatively well. I'll talk to you again about  ways to do that that will cost you virtually nothing rather than having a $3,000 or $4,000  home sleep testing unit that you then have one of, and you've got to manage that and  make sure people bring it back and then figure out, well, how do I do this and who reads it  and all that kind of stuff. All right, last, or not last, next bullet point. Surgical procedures  may be considered as a secondary treatment for OSA when CPAP or OAT is inadequate  or not tolerated. In selected cases, such as patients with concomitant dental-facial deformi -  ties, surgical intervention may be considered as a primary treatment. In other words, if they  are super retrognathic and they would look better and everything in their life would be bet -  ter if they had orthognathic surgery, well, then maybe you start there. That's logical. So if  you have a 19-year-old guy that comes in, or let's make him a little bit older so he's still not  growing, let's say a 22-year-old guy, super-duper retrognathic, and has all the problems,  has been diagnosed with sleep apnea, you want to treat this dude with an oral appliance  for the next 80 years?  [0:38:35]  I don't think so. So I would work with my oral surgeon colleagues and say, hey, what are  we thinking here? Work with your orthodontic colleagues. Make this a collaborative effort.  Just a week ago, I gave a presentation with a local orthodontist and a local oral surgeon.  And our talk was on me talking about conservative stuff. And then the orthodontist talking  about MARPE, or mini-implant-assisted rapid paddle expansion. And now it's called like  MISPE or something like that, which is micro-implant-assisted slow paddle expansion. So  it's just not the rapid part anymore. And he talked about all that. And then the surgeon  talked about orthognathic surgery. And awesome. So we kind of covered it all and we can  work together. Now, clearly, my practice, we're going to treat 10 to 1, 20 to 1, 50 to 1 with  09/01/25   Page   of 12   15

SSC 2.0 - 201: Dental Sleep Medicine-From Screening to Final Follow up  oral appliance therapy versus any of the surgical procedures they're going to do. And  probably 100 to 1 or 500 or 1,000 to 1 compared to what the oral surgeon is going to do  with orthognathic surgery.  [0:39:43]  Nevertheless, important for not only us to know of each other, but dentists in our communi -  ty to know that those things are available. All right, next, dentistry and sleep-related disor -  ders should continually update their knowledge and training of dental sleep medicine with  related continuing education. Cool. You got that in spades, don't you? Next, dentists  should maintain regular communication with the patient's referring physician and other  health care providers to the patient's treatment progress and any recommended follow-up  treatment. Absolutely, you should. And this is the biggest way that you'll grow your practice  is through proper communication with the patient's providers, not just the sleep doctor, not  just their primary care doctor, but anybody that they see, make sure that those folks know  what you're doing. Follow-up sleep testing by a physician should be conducted to evaluate  the improvement or confirm treatment efficacy for the OSA, especially if the patient devel -  ops recurring OSA, relevant symptoms or comorbidities. Follow-up sleep testing is the  physician's job and not ours. So our job is, as I'll talk about as we go through these ses -  sions, is snoring less, feeling better, or in other words, protecting the airway. As soon as  the airway is protected mechanically with oral appliance therapy, punt back to the doctor,  and then it's like, your job, you got to want to get a follow-up sleep study or not your job.  Okay, not our job, their job, which is another argument, in my opinion, for why you really  don't need to have the home sleep testing stuff because the physician should be doing fol -  low-up testing anyway.  Help the Patient Feel the Importance   [0:41:07]  Next, we want to help the patient feel the importance, and the best way to do this is by  asking questions. And sometimes there are, I call them yet questions, that can be pretty  powerful. So for example, hey, have you nodded off or fallen asleep at the wheel yet?  Have you like been stuck in traffic or whatever and you just kind of nodded off yet? Okay,  notice I just threw the yet in at the end. So even if they say no, what's implied by that ques -  tion? So the implication of that question is that you're going to, you just haven't yet. Have  you nodded off at work yet? Have you like had any events in your life where you were  someplace and you kind of fell asleep inappropriately yet? Has anything like that hap -  pened yet? Okay, so asking those questions, and again, even if they say no, I haven't,  then you might say, oh yeah.  [0:42:08]  Okay, and oh, you haven't, that hasn't happened to you yet. Man, I have a lot of patients  that say that that's happened to them. By the way, these things are important to them be -  cause falling asleep at work could get you fired, couldn't it? I mean, imagine if any of your  09/01/25   Page   of 13   15

SSC 2.0 - 201: Dental Sleep Medicine-From Screening to Final Follow up  team members and you found them sleeping at their desk or something like that, you're  not going to be super stoked about that. And after once or twice, you're probably going to  let them go sleep someplace else rather than at your office. On car accidents, this is an -  other pain point for people because it's not so simple as the car accident that I have shown  in this picture here. It's the car accident where people are injured. Okay, my dad, if you  remember his story on his trip from Boise down to Salt Lake where he fell asleep at the  wheel and rolled his Buick LeSabre four times down the middle of the road, if he would  have caused an accident that would have killed others, so if others would have been killed  because he fell asleep at the wheel, he couldn't live with himself on that.  [0:43:21]  He would have been just a wreck for the rest of his life. He would have been so guilty of  that that he caused other people to suffer. Okay, my dad was all about serving other peo -  ple and helping other people. And if that would have happened, and again, this happens  all the time, doesn't it? You know, truckers fall asleep at the wheel, people die. This hap -  pens fairly routinely that there will be a car accident that is directly related to someone fall -  ing asleep at the wheel. And very often the person fell asleep at the wheel is alive because  they're like completely relaxed and stuff so they don't get as injured as much as the person  who saw their car coming head-on or whatever. Bring those sorts of things up. Again, it's  more a matter of, hey, have you ever like nodded off the wheel when you're driving or just  like stopped in traffic or something like that? Has anything like that happened yet? Nah,  man, boy, it hasn't? Okay, that's good because I've had other patients have said that has  obviously that's super, that's something none of us ever want to experience. And heaven  forbid we fall asleep at the wheel or something like that.  [0:44:30]  I know it's I'm sure you would feel the same way I do. It's not about me falling asleep at the  wheel and getting that fender bender or something. It's about me falling asleep at the  wheel and other people getting massively injured or even killed. That's the thing we're try -  ing to avoid here. Okay. Most humans are going to be like, that's a good point. The dying  part, we sometimes will try to connect to that and we'll do it in a clinical sort of way, which  is saying things like, yeah untreated sleep apnea is going to give you a much higher risk of  stroke and heart attack. Okay, true. But that's relatively sterile, right? Like that doesn't, that  doesn't bring any emotion into it. So the questions to ask on this, hey, in your family, any -  body in your family guys in your family that died relatively young of heart attacks or strokes  or things like that, that makes it real. I remember one time a young man that we treated,  this is when I was out helping to practice in North Carolina. And he came in and he had  actually gotten on CPAP.  [0:45:41]  So we had screened him doing all the stuff that we're talking about here and referred him  for an evaluation. And he got diagnosed with sleep apnea, was put on CPAP, and he came  in and I happened to be there. And he actually thanked me and he said, yeah, it's, I'm real -  ly grateful for coming into the office here and having this picked up because I'm 32 years  old and on, I take after my mom's side of the family and her brothers and father and the  09/01/25   Page   of 14   15

SSC 2.0 - 201: Dental Sleep Medicine-From Screening to Final Follow up  men in her on her side of the family. There's never been a man live past the age of 40.  Whoa. Right. So he was looking at the last years of his life, potentially maybe be the first  guy. And, and he's like, yeah, all of them, all of them snored. All of them had this problem.  All of them had these things. Now that I now that I know what to look for now that I know  what I have. Okay? Those are the kind of stories, those are the kind of things. And as you  start treating more people, remember those stories. And it's helpful to tell a patient, oh,  yeah, I had a patient that, and you can kind of go through that with them.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 15   15

