SSC 2.0 - 215: Predict the Problems BEFORE They Occur  SSC 2.0   Level 2  215: Predict the Problems BEFORE  They Occur  [intro music]  Predict the Problem Before They Occur   [0:00:12]  Now let's talk again about predicting the problems before they occur.  [video playback]  Here’s our wonderful joint videos slide again that you've seen a bunch of times by now  probably. And of course, we have just to go over this, review it again, we have our normal  joint up here. Pointing out again that big space between the top of the condyle and the top  of the fossa. That's really key here to understanding this joint stuff. So in a normal joint,  there's a lot of space. And when you hear things like most superior, the goal is not to jam  the condyle up so far, the farthest you possibly can without the disc jumping out of place  because of that pressure on it. That's not the goal. The goal is to have the disc in place. In  our reducing displacement, there's no room at all for the disc to be in place. And keep in  mind that at the end of this kind of closing stroke, we are assuming that the cadaver's  teeth are being put together.  [0:01:15]  So in occlusion, we have a disc displacement. There's no room for the disc to be in place  when the teeth are in occlusion and non-reducing displacement, the disc is no longer pop -  ping on and off the condyle anymore. It just stays on the anterior aspect of the condyle. So  it's non-reducing. It's not coming back into place. And this of course, has no clicking any -  more, which is kind of a bummer because that means as this problem progresses, the pa -  tient's perception is that they've gotten better unless they notice that their range of motion  is different, and often they do not. And then the last step of this would be a bone-on-bone  situation if the person does wear through that retrodiscal tissue. Clearly, that doesn't al -  ways happen, or we wouldn't have these other examples here, but sometimes that can  happen. And then we tend to see this bony changes and morphological changes from this  arthritic breakdown. Whereas if you look at the reducing displacement and the non-reduc -  ing displacement, you don't really see problems with the condyle. If you were to look just at  an X-ray of those, you wouldn't see anything terribly out of the ordinary, unless you were  looking at a closed view on a cone beam CT, so not on a pano, biting out on the stick. But  if you had a closed view on a cone beam CT, you should theoretically see that there's zero  space between, or virtually zero space between the condyle and the fossa.   If you took that  09/01/25   Page   of 1   12

SSC 2.0 - 215: Predict the Problems BEFORE They Occur  cut, you'd be like, wow, those are really close together. How could there possibly be room  for the disc?  [end of video playback]  [0:02:51]  All right, so understanding this is important. You're not gonna be able to tell this on a pano,  on a traditional pano. If you do a cone beam CT and you do a recreated pano, that's a dif -  ferent story. But just with a pano, are we gonna treat people just with a pano? I think that  we are moving towards cone beam CT becoming the standard of care. It's not, as of 2025,  it's not published anywhere that you have to take a cone beam CT, but everybody in the  field is taking cone beam CTs on their patients. Not necessarily mandatory. I've treated  thousands of patients with less than a cone beam CT, thousands. I've treated relatively re -  cently, patients with only a pano. And we always get a pano though, to rule out any dental  issues and things like that and to give us an idea of what's going on in the jaw joint. So I'm  not saying you have to have a cone beam CT in order to treat a patient, but I would strong -  ly encourage it, and I've talked about that before.  [0:03:57]  So cone beam CT is gonna show you these things. Now, are you gonna know for sure  about disc displacements and stuff? Of course not. You would need an MRI for that. But  once again, if you have a cone beam CT and the condyle and the fossa are basically  touching each other, is the disc in place? Clearly not. [laughter] So then either they have a  reducing displacement, which you would know 'cause it would click, or they have a non-  reducing displacement, and typically that's gonna be my jaw used to pop and click, every  once in a while it would catch on me, I've been squashing Subway sandwiches for 20  years. That's gonna be your history of someone with a non-reducing displacement.  Patient Education   [0:04:35]  Absolutely, if you do not have the TMJ Demonstrator yet, please, please, please get this  and learn how to use it. I was talking to a business lead member recently, and she was  talking about that she struggled to use this, and she was using pictures and stuff like that,  and I'm like, it's not as good 'cause this moves. So that was her problem, not a problem  with the model. But however, to her point and to support her, it takes some practice.  [0:05:09]  So this is a little bit of a magic trick to make this thing work just right, and it tends to actual -  ly get better with use, and you get better at it too. So put the time and effort into it, to use  this tool. Everyone follows with this. They really get it, and that's the important thing here,  is to help your patient understand what's going on, to help them understand what normal  is, what a reducing displacement is, and what you're gonna be doing when you put that  oral appliance in. So this marked here as splint or orthotic, that's our sleep appliance in  this scenario. And in someone with a reducing displacement, it is bringing the condyle un -  09/01/25   Page   of 2   12

SSC 2.0 - 215: Predict the Problems BEFORE They Occur  der the disc. And remember, when they put that appliance in, they're having to open their  mouth big, stick it in, and then close down, and it's keeping their vertical way higher and  anterior, so the odds of them slipping off their disc with that oral appliance in their mouth  are darn near zero. It's super rare that that's gonna happen. So they're gonna now be on  the disc, so let's say you've got some with a reducing disc displacement, are they spend -  ing more time on the disc or off the disc?  [0:06:22]  That's a, it depends question, because if they are a 1% occluder, and they kind of pop onto  the disc, and then they hold their jaw a little forward, and this is what I do actually, then  they might actually be on the disc quite a bit during the day. It would only be when they  swallow, if they put their teeth together when they swallow, that they would go back off the  disc. So it's possible to have a reducing disc displacement and actually spend quite a bit of  time on the disc. But in order to fully occlude, they're gonna have to get off that disc by de -  finition of a reducing disc displacement. Now on the other hand, the person who tells you,  oh yeah, my jaw pops and clicks all day long, well, probably more than a 1% occluder,  maybe they're a 5% or a 10% occluder, they're gonna be closing their teeth together, get -  ting off that disc more, and then they pop when they move their jaw into a position that  gets them back on the disc.  [0:07:19]  And now all of a sudden, they're going to be on the disc for six, seven, eight hours in a  row. and it's probably unlikely, that they were six, seven, eight hours in a row on the disc  prior to this. Except for back when their disc was normally in place, assuming that there  was a time that it was. Okay, got it? This is important, so it's very important that the person  understands what's going on in their jaw, why, what's going on with that click, that the click  is coming into position, not out of position, and that the appliance that you're fitting in with  is bringing them into position. Now, a reason that you may not have thought about of why  this is so important, is it's possible that your patient is gonna talk to other people about  their treatment. And those other people could be other dentists, an orthodontist, surgeon,  ear, nose, and throat doctor, whatever. How likely are those other professionals to under -  stand what's going on in the jaw joint? With the exception of the oral surgeons, and proba -  bly the ENTs, I don't think that many dental professionals understand this. In my lectures  around the world, my experience has been that over 80% of dental professionals with a  reducing disc displacement, don't understand that they're clicking when they open into po -  sition.  [0:08:58]  They thought they were clicking out of position. I would guess, if we took a poll that 80 plus  percent of patients with reducing disc displacements are told by their dental professionals  the opposite of what's going on. So therefore, is it possible that someone could go in,  they're talking, yeah, I wear this, and then my jaw is clicking quite a bit, I notice right first  thing in the morning, and them being told, oh, well, that's probably because it's taking you  off the disc or something like that. They would be completely bass-ackwards on their de -  scription of it, but the patient's gonna believe them, because there's this clicking. So make  09/01/25   Page   of 3   12

SSC 2.0 - 215: Predict the Problems BEFORE They Occur  sure you really educate the patient well, so that they could actually, frankly, educate an -  other dental professional on like, well, no, dental professional, it's when I open my jaw, it's  popping into place, it's on the disc, the oral appliance is keeping me on the disc all night  long, I think why I'm noticing that clicking more, is because it's been in place for so long  that finally once my teeth go back together, I'm noticing that crack, crack, crack when I'm  going off the disc 'cause I've been on the disc for all night long. That would be cool. So the  only way you're gonna do that, in my opinion, is with this. You could show the joint videos  to the person who has some medical background, but get the TMJ Demonstrator from  Great Lakes, let them know you're a Spencer Study Club member, I think they give you a  little discount, doesn't matter if they do or not, 'cause it is worth the 300 bucks or whatever  it is for this. This is something you will use every day with darn near every patient, to edu -  cate them on what's going on.  Avoiding Problems   [0:10:39]  All right, so patients reducing disc displacement, the jaw may desire to stay more anterior  'cause that's actually in centric relation, it's disc in place. Patients with a non-reducing disc  displacement, this added, "stress" of their jaw being forward, and remember, the appliance  is holding them forward, so there could be some stress there with the disc out of place  that's a different position than just their jaw falling backwards. Could result in this previous -  ly asymptomatic problem becoming symptomatic. "For the asymptomatic was because  they're not in pain, they're not in dysfunction, they don't have any issue with it, but they're  out."  [0:11:19]  So it'd be like, someone with a slipped disc or something, but they have no pain or dys -  function, they don't even know that they got a problem, it's only on MRI that it's incidentally  found or something like that. That'd be the case here. So it's possible that someone has  lived quite a normal life as far as they're concerned with their non-reducing displacement.  Now because of this new thing, that's going on and this six, seven, eight hours a night of  traction on their jaw, the disc starts to either those tissues start to give them a little bit of an  issue or even their jaw could start clicking, 'cause they could start actually getting back on  the disc, which would be awesome. And if you've educated them, then they'll think it's  awesome too. If they don't understand what's going on their jaw joint, they're not gonna  think it's awesome that all of a sudden their jaw that hasn't clicked for 20 years is now  clicking. All of these patients need to be treated. You just need to inform them, and that's  the point of the TMJ Demonstrator.  Some Common Side Effects   [0:12:18]  09/01/25   Page   of 4   12

SSC 2.0 - 215: Predict the Problems BEFORE They Occur  All right, so some common side effect instructions. So tooth movement, we want that  world's greatest flosser. Jaw position changes, we want the morning repositioner or repro -  grammer, and check your bite every night. So floss like a boss, check your bite every  night. Thank you, Dr. Jessica Sabot, for coming up with that. Floss like a boss, check your  bite every night. Those are the keys. That's the most important. Now along with that, is the  educating the patient on, well, what am I looking for? So the floss, it's snap, snap, snap,  assuming that it's snap, snap, snap, pretreatment. And then it's going from snap to slide.  You got to teach them that. So they got to know what's normal. And this is the advantage  of starting people, as I mentioned before, with the floss like a boss, check your bite every  night. You need to start them pretreatment, okay? You start them pretreatment and get  them used to flossing and checking their bite. So the next thing, check your bite every  night. Well, what if they're biting on their front teeth every night? Huh? Yeah, that feels just  like yesterday. You know that most of your patients are pretty clueless on anything related  to their bite.  [0:13:33]  So is this gonna change all of a sudden? Just because you talk to them about it, you're  like, hey, check your bite, and you do it. And they're like, okay. So remember, most of your  patients have no clue. So this is something you have to teach them. And this is where you  get out the shim stock, teach them what it feels like, like that. Dr. Nancy Addy's suggestion  of the post-it note flags, get those little plastic flags, send them home with them. That's  their shim stock to use at home. Teach them what that feels like and do this, ideally, before  they've got their oral appliance. Do this once you've taken your record so they can be  practicing this. And then when they come in to get their appliance, you or your team mem -  ber can say, "Hey, how's it been going with flossing like a boss, checking your bite every  night? Any questions on that?" Show me how you're using the little post-it tab here. Let me  give you one. Show me how you do that. And if they do it wrong, then you re-instruct them  and help them to understand that.  [0:14:31]  Help them to feel that their back teeth are touching. If you will take the time to do this, you  will not have patients with side effects. I can say that pretty definitively. Or if the patients  have side effects, you're gonna catch them super early, which is really easy to deal with.  The problem people are the ones that go for months or years with their bite off, with tooth  movement that they're packing food in between their teeth, stuff like that. That's where we  get problematic. And that's darn rare if you do everything right and the patient understands  what they're supposed to do. So both of those things have to happen.  Confirm “Wrapping” of the Most Distal Tooth   [0:15:13]  We talked earlier about wrapping the distal of the most distal tooth on the bottom. Once  again, this is because we're anchoring to the maxilla. The forces on the maxilla are retru -  09/01/25   Page   of 5   12

SSC 2.0 - 215: Predict the Problems BEFORE They Occur  sive to the maxillary teeth, but they are protrusive to the mandibular teeth. So if we don't  wrap the distal of that tooth, it's possible that the other teeth could be pulled away from  that last tooth. Is that gonna happen for sure? Not necessarily, but it could happen. So  whenever possible, wrap that distal we talked about during the fitting session, that we  talked about that sometimes that's not possible, but do your best to do that.  Morning Reprogrammer: The Cowboy Hat   [0:15:49]  On the morning reprogrammer, again, the word reprogrammer because this is the opposite  of a deprogrammer. All appliances that go between the teeth are a deprogrammer. This is  our reprogrammer. We've gone through this before, so I'll do this quickly, but we're going to  put this on their front teeth. We're using shim stock to make gosh darn sure, that their back  teeth are touching. Put that on their lower front teeth. Have them close into it, being very  careful not to wrap it onto the facial surfaces of the upper teeth. They need to be able to  see their teeth seating fully in the anterior or the morning reprogrammer. And we're check -  ing with shim stock with the morning reprogrammer in place. There are other ways to do  this too. So there's something called the AM aligner that you may have in your drawers if  you've been doing this for a while, if you've made any tap appliances or stuff or my tap.  And actually Keith Thornton came up with this. He's like, hey he figured out too. Yeah,  we'd actually like those back teeth touching. We want that proprioception of the posterior  teeth in occlusion. So he's like, "Well, let's just cut these things in thirds and we'll use them  in the front." So my team came up with this. They call it the cowboy hat. So you warm it up,  stick it on the lower teeth and then fold up the edges to get a sort of cowboy hat looking  thing. So an upside down cowboy hat there, and that will definitely guide that person's jaw  into position. Now I call this the morning reprogrammer. I've mentioned this before, but to  repeat myself, maybe not morning. So first thing in the morning, you want people taking  their appliance out, and then jamming this in and slamming their teeth together as hard as  they can 'cause they're gonna hurt themselves. I believe there's fluid that accumulates in  the joint with it being in that protruded position throughout the night, being held in that po -  sition throughout the night. I don't think it's a lateral pterygoid issue. It's possible that it  could be, but because the jaw is being held in position, not by muscles, but just by the an -  chorage on the maxilla, I think it's more of a fluid type of dynamic.  [0:17:47]  When you go to close, the condyle can't seat all the way is the issue. And that I believe is  the problem. So don't have them necessarily do this immediately first thing in the morning.  One article that I wrote for the SSC newsletter, I referred to this as the afternoon repro -  grammer. And another article that I wrote, I called it the re-injurer, meaning the people that  are hurting themselves with their morning AM aligner, morning occlusal guide, whatever  you wanna call it. So just make sure you explain to the patient that this is not something  that they need to freak out about if their teeth aren't back together 10 minutes after they  09/01/25   Page   of 6   12

SSC 2.0 - 215: Predict the Problems BEFORE They Occur  take their appliance out, that they should just go about their life like normal, and then use  this to kind of guide their jaw back into position. Here's just a couple of pictures of those.  And once again, check with shim stock when you are fitting the morning reprogrammer,  afternoon reprogrammer, whatever you wanna call it, making sure that the person is actu -  ally in occlusion, they're holding that shim stock. Okay, that's important.  Avoiding Problems  Consent, Educate, and Consent Some More!   [0:18:51]  Consent, educate, consent some more, explain to the patient the side effects will most  likely occur. That surprises you probably, because we usually want to downplay side ef -  fects. And I don't think that that's correct. I don't think you should do that. I think you should  tell people, hey, if you don't do what we're telling you here, these are gonna happen. It's  probably not an if, it's just a when. If you don't floss like a boss, if you don't check your bite  every night, it's probable that your bite's gonna change and stuff. And that could cost thou -  sands of dollars to get your bite back and hassles that you don't wanna go through. So  please, please, please do what we're asking you to. So let them know that they are likely  to occur, but they can be avoided, again, if they do what you've asked them to. Lower  those expectations, let them know that it's going to take time to get used to the appliance.  It takes most people a few weeks to get used to it, and that snoring may not go away im -  mediately. If they tried CPAP, you can make that correlation there and say, yeah, you know  what, the cool thing with CPAP is, it always works, just a lot of people can't tolerate it. But  when you tried that CPAP that first night, they'd already kind of set it up so that it would  blow your airway open. With the oral appliance, we're starting in a comfortably protruded  position for you. That's probably gonna work for most of our patients. That works really  well. You might need a little bit more adjustment on that. That's what we're here for. That's  what we're gonna do.  Dealing with Problems (Tooth Movement)   [0:20:20]  All right, now let's talk about dealing with problems. So is it possible that you're gonna  have some problems? Yeah, and these things are gonna come up and it's important that  you know how to deal with them. So let's talk about tooth movement first. Number one, ad -  just the appliance. So on tooth movement, we've got that traction effect, but then we also  have the embrasure effect. So the first thing I would do, so let's say, and the most common  issue, is that first and second molar on the lower. So let's say that those have separated  and we've got a space now between the first and second molar. And we're gonna go in,  first thing we're going to do is basically remove any material that's in the embrasures be -  09/01/25   Page   of 7   12

SSC 2.0 - 215: Predict the Problems BEFORE They Occur  tween the first and second molar to give space there, that we can then more easily get  those teeth to come back into position.  [0:21:10]  Invisalign effect. So you've got models of your patient and you should keep those, in my  opinion, forever. Now I know your state law says like seven years or whatever. I would  keep them as long as you practice if I were you. And then if you sell your practice to  somebody else, I'd keep them then too. We have a whole room in our practice that is re -  served for records. Now with digital records, that's getting easier. And yeah, are you gonna  have terabytes eventually of files and stuff like that? Yeah, so what? So I would keep that  and way longer than your state laws need that to be because wouldn't it be neat if 20  years from now, someone's on their fifth appliance, you've made each additional appliance  on their original scans, you're gonna keep those teeth. It's just like they're wearing their  retainer all those years. That'd be pretty cool. So if you have stone models, I would digitize  them and have that so that you can keep those easily without having banker's boxes  everywhere full of records.  [0:22:18]  The Invisalign effect that I'm talking about, is just simply making a Invisalign style tray and  a liner on that arch where the teeth have moved. And then they would wear that appliance  during the day, all day long, they'd wear their Invisalign tray. And then at nighttime, you've  modified their sleep appliance by taking out the embrasures there, to allow there to be  space for that tooth to move. So those are super important things. We made it so that  there's room or more easily for that tooth to go back into place. And now they're wearing  the Invisalign tray, when? All day long. So as soon as they wake up in the morning, they  pop that in. That is in their mouth all day long, except for eating and stuff. And then they  wear their sleep appliance at night like they normally do.  [0:23:05]  I’ve had a couple of patients where we've had to actually get the orthodontist involved. I  don't do any orthodontics in our practice, so you might. And if you do, this would be super  easy for you. But they would put on buttons on those second molars and then just put a  little power chain or elastics or whatever to pull the teeth together and pretty quick. Did that  kind of probably rotate and pull the teeth together? Yeah, so what? We just add a contact  again and then everything's cool.  [0:23:33]  So I have worked with orthodontists in the past. Luckily, I can count on a couple fingers the  number of times we've had to do that. So it's not a routine thing, but that is something that  you might need to do. As I already explained, have your records, keep those dang records  for a long time. All right, so adjust the appliance then. We talked about that. Wrap the dis -  tal. So now that we've kind of got it back, now what? So wrap the distal if we can. So let's  say, that these teeth moved and you kind of missed it. So now you're looking at this case  and you're like, oh darn, this doesn't wrap the distal of the most distal tooth. I missed that.  Okay, well now here's your chance to fix that. So either you're gonna add acrylic or you're  gonna reprint it or remill it or whatever with that wrapped around the distal. So once you've  09/01/25   Page   of 8   12

SSC 2.0 - 215: Predict the Problems BEFORE They Occur  got that space closed, either by doing that Invisalign effect or getting with the orthodontist  or doing the orthodontics yourself to pull things together, then you need to go back and  make sure that this isn't gonna move again.  [0:24:35]  So whenever possible, wrap that distal. I've had a few cases, again not a lot, but we've  had a few where we've added a wire, because we couldn't get acrylic back there, but we  were able to work with an orthodontic lab and just do a little wire back there to wrap the  distal. If you can't, if there's nothing you can do about this, then go ahead and just educate  the patient again that hey, this might happen from time to time. So what I need you to do is  with your floss like a boss every night and then with that other aligner appliance, is maybe  once a week wear that for two or three hours, make sure it fits, make sure it's not feeling  tight back there. Let's do that every once in a while to just make sure that this is kind of  fine tuned back into position. So the goal there, get the space closed, adjust the appliance  to ideally be a retainer in and of itself.  Jaw Position Changes   [0:25:36]  Now let's talk about jaw position changes. All right, so minor, perhaps do nothing. And I'm  not a big fan of the idea of this is a better position. There's some people who teach that.  I've had actually arguments with multiple people in our field talking about that, well like a  phrase you'll hear sometimes is if they have an airway problem at night, they have an air -  way problem during the day. Do they? I don't know that that's true. So your body's pretty  good at keeping your airway open. Is it possible that you could actually hold your jaw a lit -  tle bit forward? So again, I think sometimes we dentists were so conflicted on this because  again, every dentist will say, oh yeah, teeth should never touch. But then at the same time,  they'd be like, well, this new bite is good because it holds your jaw in a different position.  When is it holding your jaw in a different position? Well, when your teeth touch. When do  your teeth touch? Never. Do you see how that is ridiculous? Like that makes no sense. So  teeth don't touch, but the bite holds your jaw in a different position. So if you believe that  this new bite was good, then theoretically, you should be teaching your patients that they  should hold their teeth together all the time.  [0:26:58]  Because if their teeth are apart, then we're not having that positive effect of the new bite.  So think that through. That doesn't make any sense to me. So I'm a believer that we don't  have to change bites. Now, if you want to change their bite, if you want them to do that  stuff, cool. I'm fine with that. And I'll teach you how to do that in level three with the TMJ  stuff that's called phase two. And you can go through that. That's great. However, wouldn't  it be cool if you knew how to treat people with mandibular advancement devices without  changing their bite? 'Cause sooner or later, you're gonna have somebody who's had their  bite changed, either through crowns or orthodontics, and they're not stoked about having  09/01/25   Page   of 9   12

SSC 2.0 - 215: Predict the Problems BEFORE They Occur  that redone. And maybe you're the one that even did it. You did a full math recon on  somebody. They've got a beautiful smile. They're happy as a clam. And they come in and  when you say, do you snore? They say, yes. When you say, does your bed partner say  you ever stop breathing? They say, yes. And you're like, oh, suck. They've got an airway  issue.  [0:27:53]  I better deal with that at night when this is happening. What if their bite changes? That  would be a situation where I think the old bite bad, new bite good. I don't know that your  patient's gonna be too stoked about that and either are you. So we don't have to have bite  changes. So if you do what I've told you to, you're not gonna have bite changes in the first  place, but let's say that the patient doesn't do what you've told them to, and they have  some minor changes. Then possibly, you would just leave it alone. Perhaps you make a  tooth protector or something like that for them to wear and try to get their jaw position back  to normal if they're smacking on their front teeth. Perhaps you're gonna fit that morning re -  programmer on their models, and we've got a how-to video on how to do that. It's never as  good as doing it in their mouth, that's for sure, if you're using that thermoplastic method,  but maybe you could do a printed version of this or even a milled version of this. Milled and  printed versions in general don't allow full contact posteriorly. Sometimes they do.  [0:28:53]  So it just kind of depends on the patient's overbite, overjet, things like that. Ideally, you  want the back teeth to touch. So that we have that proprioception. Okay, if it's a major  problem, then what's our plan? And that's where I talked about maybe they were looking at  orthodontics. Maybe they're looking at doing orthognathic surgery, stuff like that. If that's  part of the plan, then all right, then I'm cool with you too. So you could move in that direc -  tion. Now here's the real key with jaw position changes that gets missed all the darn time.  And I'm sure I missed this too, originally on. So you've got, let's say the patient has the  morning reprogrammer. Or let's say they don't. You make one for them on models. You  educate them on what's going on. By the way, again, most of the cases I've ever seen  where people have had a bite change, they didn't know. It was the hygienist that picked it  up. They're not like, "Oh, look, my bite changed." So you educate them on what we're  gonna need to do to get it back.  [0:30:00]  And then here's the key and let me teach you the key by asking you a question. If they're  using whatever exercise or morning reprogrammer or whatever to get their jaw to go back,  let's say they're using that three times a day, 10, 15 minutes at a time, which would be a  lot. But let's just say they're doing that. How likely is that to work, if they are wearing their  oral appliance still in a protruded position six, seven, eight hours a night? Okay, you get it?  You're not gonna undo six, seven, eight hours of activity with even three sessions of 15  minutes of exercises. So what do they have to do in order to get their jaw to go back? Did  you say go without the appliance? That would be correct. They have to go without the ap -  pliance. Now we've got a little bit of cover our butt here to do, because remember that this  appliance, if you're in the United States anyway, was prescribed by a physician typically.  09/01/25   Page   of 10   12

SSC 2.0 - 215: Predict the Problems BEFORE They Occur  Okay, when you're treating obstructive sleep apnea, this is by prescription. So for you to  take them off their prescribed therapy, technically not in your scope.  [0:31:21]  So I would talk to the patient and say, hey, still got your CPAP machine? We'd really like  you to go back on CPAP while we're getting your bite to go back. And they may say, nope,  that's for sure not gonna happen. So if you want to really protect yourself in that case, I  would communicate with the doctor. Hey doctor, this patient's had a little bit of a bite shift.  We're going to be able to, we're gonna try to get her bite back. But during this three week-  ish period that we're doing this, I'm gonna have her go without her oral appliance. We okay  with that, or are you of the opinion that her sleep apnea is so important that we treat that  the bite change is just something that we have to deal with in some other way, which  would be potentially orthodontics or otherwise? It's all gonna be a hassle no matter what it  is. But are you of the opinion that her going without any treatment at all is just not advis -  able whatsoever? And then the doctor's like, "No based on her medical history and every -  thing else, I don't think she's gonna die or have a stroke in the next three weeks. So go for  it. You know, do what you need to do."  [0:32:22]  Okay. And then you would note that. All right. The minimum, minimum, minimum that you  would do, is I told the patient that they need to use CPAP during this period of time while  we're trying to get their bite back in the chart. Like you would for sure document that for  sure have that conversation with the patient. But I can virtually guarantee you, that it's  gonna be harder than heck to get the bite to go back if it's been off for months or potential -  ly even years with a little bit of exercises and then reinforcing the forward position with six  to seven to eight hours of oral appliance therapy every night. So don't make that mistake.  If you're trying to get a bite to go back, they got to go without their appliance. If they don't  go without their appliance, you're never gonna get the bite back. Or it's extremely rare that  you get the bite back. The only time that it would work to get the bite back is if they were  just completely clueless.  [0:33:16]  And let's say that they're back for their second follow up or something. They've only been  wearing the appliance for a month or two. And you notice that there's a little bit of poster  open bite that's developed. And you're like, hey, show me how you're using that morning  reprogrammer. And they're like, that what? What are you talking about? Oh, that chewed  up piece of gum thing. Oh, shoot. I must have lost that or whatever. That's a different story.  So in that case, if it's been relative, this is relatively acute problem, then it's possible that  all they're gonna need to do, is maybe use a little bit of a leaf gauge with proper instruc -  tion, use the morning reprogrammer, and they can get their bite back sometimes literally  while they're there. You could give them a leaf gauge, show them how to chew on that.  Just say, hey, just chew on this for me. I'm gonna go see another patient. I'll be back in a  couple of minutes. You come back and they're already back together. And then you teach  them that. Go through the shim stock stuff again. Go make them a morning reprogrammer,  right now. Make sure it holds shim stock. And then they can continue wearing their oral  09/01/25   Page   of 11   12

SSC 2.0 - 215: Predict the Problems BEFORE They Occur  appliance like normal.   Okay. It's only these people that their bites been off for months or  literally years, that are gonna have to go without their appliance to get their bite to come  back.  “Nothing is Free”   [0:34:23]  And remember, nothing's free. Side effects with almost any treatment. There's side effects  with no treatment like dying, for example, which side effects is the patient willing to live  with? Don't be scared of the side effects. Get into treatment. My gosh, if medical doctors  were scared of side effects, then no one would get treatment ever. Because medications  you've seen all the commercials. There's never been a medication commercial on the TV  that didn't have 4,000 side effects listed at the end while the people are frolicking through  the field and stuff like that for whatever medication that they're on that's changed their life.  There's a million darn side effects. Our side effects are relatively minor. And once again, if  they will communicate with you, if they will keep their long-term follow-up, if they will work  with you in this bespoke custom treatment that you are providing for them, that is so much  better than something they could get online or that they get at Walgreens, this is why they  need you.  [0:35:26]  This is the care you're providing. And if they will communicate and keep their follow-up like  they should, then their side effects should be minimal or non-existent. I've been wearing  an appliance for years. I'm fine. No tooth movement, no bite changes, no nothing. Your pa -  tients don't have to have that either. If you just follow these simple rules. Okay, that's the  end of this.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 12   12

