SSC 2.0 - 214: It's NOT Always About the Anatomy  SSC 2.0   Level 2  214: It's NOT Always About the Anatomy  [intro music]  It’s Not Always About the Anatomy   [0:00:12]  It's also not always about the anatomy and I would encourage you to get into the the litera -  ture center in Spencer Study Club and familiarize yourself with this study. This was done  by Danny Eckert's group. Danny Eckert is very pro oral appliance therapy and in this he's  kind of showing graphically here where the the big problem is and us dentists as surgeons  we want it to be all about the anatomy don't we? You want to expand that palate put in 18  different you know 18 more pre molars and that's going to cure their problem. Maybe  maybe not. So the big arrow is narrow crowded collapsible upper airway. We've got the big  arrow to OSA. So this is their group saying you know what anatomy is a lot of it. However  then we have something called a low arousal threshold and we have this over here poor  muscle responsiveness. So it's kind of called the lazy tongue syndrome or just that the  muscles are not responsive and protecting the airway. The muscle responsiveness during  the day is there. So none of us have obstructive sleep apnea during the day. It's only as a  nighttime thing when that when that automatic reflex of protecting the airway goes away.  [0:01:30]  And then we have this high loop gain and loop gain is something also that I'm not a super  expert in. But the simple analogy that I use is it's kind of like over correcting. If you have  ever and again this is probably a bad analogy because only people my age are going to  understand it. But if you've ever driven a rear wheel drive car on snow if you start to slide  you have to turn into the slide and then that makes you slide the other way because the  force is coming from the back wheels. This does not do the same thing on a front wheel  drive car. But you would sometimes over correct. So you go a little bit and then it's swerv -  ing and that's called fishtailing. You can over correct and other things too and that's what  loop gain is. It's basically the body over correcting. Like we think this needs to happen and  then this happens and it's just back and forth and that's called high loop gain. So this low  arousal threshold meaning I'm just going to sleep through being suffocated to death.  That'd be the low arousal threshold. Poor muscle responsiveness. My muscles aren't hav -  ing the tone that they should have.  [0:02:38]  Also part of getting older and floppier. And then this high loop gain principle. These things  contribute to it too and this is why you can have somebody with a darn narrow airway that  has no obstructive sleep apnea. If it was just purely anatomy then that would never hap -  pen. This is also why you can have a patient with a pretty darn big airway so you get a  09/01/25   Page   of 1   17

SSC 2.0 - 214: It's NOT Always About the Anatomy  cone beam CT and you're like dang that's a good looking airway. Person's stopping  breathing all the time because of these other principles. So don't always make it about the  airway.  Smallest Airway I’ve Ever Seen   [0:03:10]  So let me tell you about one of the smallest airways I've ever seen. And you see the air -  way here on the cone beam CT and you may say well I've seen narrower airways than that  Jamison and so have I. But have you ever seen an airway that's this narrow and that long?  So this was a real tall guy and very thin and had this very long and narrow airway. And he  came in to the point of that being if it's longer it's more collapsible. So a short airway less  collapsible, long airway more collapsible, long narrow would be the worst case scenario  there. And so that's why I point that out that it's the smallest airway because it is long and  narrow so meaning that it's the I should actually probably call this the one of the most col -  lapsible airways that I've ever seen or one of the most likely to be collapsible airways I've  ever seen.  [0:04:09]  And then we'll see in a minute that that wasn't actually the case. But he came in for a TMJ  problem and it was mostly muscular pain that he was suffering with. And I saw this on the  cone beam CT. We checked out his jaw joints. We did our normal examination and what -  not. And in seeing his airway and talking about his sleep and he was really struggling to  sleep. And he said he'd like wake up a lot at night and he'd have some kind of muscle dis -  comfort and had a hard time sleeping. And this young man, he was in his 20s, had kidney  disease and he was in end stage kidney failure and was on a transplant list. But he was  basically going to die. And there was not a lot of hope for him. And I've never wanted. I  thought to myself, well, sleep apnea seems to impact dang near everything.  [0:05:10]  Let's see if it affects kidney disease. So I go to the Google and look for different articles.  And sure enough, I find something that correlated sleep apnea and renal failure. And I'm  like, oh, my gosh. So I have never wanted a patient to have sleep apnea more than this  guy in my entire career because he had little kids. You know, he's married and he's in his  20s and he's basically fixing to die here. So we get him in for a sleep study and here's the  results of that. He did have some desaturations, but look at his AHI data here. So his non-  REM was three events. This is total. In-REM, one. Total sleep time says two, which is in -  teresting because he's got non-REM and REM. You would think that that would add up,  but whatever. We have AHI supine is one. AHI non-supine is three. Here says respiratory  disturbance index. So remember, respiratory disturbance index takes into account RIRAs,  respiratory effort-related arousals, not just AHI, and the numbers are the same. So they're  saying that the whole total sleep time is like two. Central apnea had a few of those.  [0:06:32]  09/01/25   Page   of 2   17

SSC 2.0 - 214: It's NOT Always About the Anatomy  So overall obstructive apneas were two. Couple central hypopneas. Bottom line, though,  his total index was basically zero. Had no sleep apnea. He did have some events here and  there, but really not kind of what I was hoping for. I was hoping to see that this guy had  clear obstructive sleep apnea and that he could then be treated and his kidney failure  would reverse. That would have been pretty cool, right? But we did learn something in the  sleep study. And this is another value of a PSG versus an HSD. So I sent this guy in with  the sleep doctor. As you know, I don't refer for sleep studies. I work with sleep doctors. And  then based on kind of to a degree what I want, I know who to refer to. And I referred him to  a sleep doctor who I knew would get a PSG. And he gets a PSG. And by the way, on that  point too, why was a PSG so important to me in this case? Because this dude is the far -  thest thing from a fat old man. So I'm going to need all of the data possible to look into  what's going on here.  [0:07:49]  So we need the full PSG experience. And he has that and no sleep apnea at all and  comes back. And in the report, it said that the patient had to get up multiple times through -  out the night because of leg cramps he was experiencing. Okay, well, I come to find out  that that had something to do with the dialysis. It had something to do with the medications  he was on that he would have these muscle cramps. Well, guess what else is a muscle?  Masseter, temporalis. So his TMJ muscle pain was just the same pain that he had in his  legs, in his face. Now, good news, we were able to get him to some physical therapy and  that helped with that. And then I followed up with him because I was interested to see what  happened. And he is still alive. He was able to get a kidney transplant and everything  turned out okay. But the reason I show you this again is don't always jump to conclusions  that a narrow airway, a small airway, a long and narrow airway is going to mean that for  sure that person has sleep apnea because there's these other things involved, right?  There's the collapsibility. There's the muscle tone. There's these other things. But what I  did is I didn't treat him for his airway problem. I got him diagnosed. And then I knew if he  had an airway problem or not. Okay, so you've heard me say before, when in doubt, rule it  out. When in doubt, rule it out.  The ULTIMATE “Expansion Treatment”   [0:09:26]  Now, what about expansion, right? So this is something we talk about a lot. And we focus  on the maxilla. And we focus on the maxilla for a couple reasons. One, the roof of the  mouth is the floor of the nose. So by expanding the maxilla, we're going to expand the  nasal airway and hopefully make it easier for that person to breathe through their nose.  Now, people don't typically have nasal obstructive sleep apnea because you would  breathe through your mouth. Your brain is smart enough to not let you die when you have  a cold and you have a stuffed up nose. So we don't necessarily have obstructive sleep ap -  nea that's purely nasal. But nevertheless, that's one of the reasons that we expand the  09/01/25   Page   of 3   17

SSC 2.0 - 214: It's NOT Always About the Anatomy  maxilla. But even if we had made the maxilla this big, the jaw could still fall backwards and  obstruct the airway, right?  [0:10:20]  The other reason that we focus on the maxilla is because we can actually do something.  And we can do some things surgically pretty simple. As a matter of fact, I was talking to an  orthodontist the other day, a local here, a friend of mine, that is doing MARPE, or now  that's been termed MISPE, I think it is, which is mini implant. So MARPE is mini implant-  assisted rapid palatal expansion. And MISPE is mini implant-assisted slow maxillary ex -  pansion, I think. Yeah, that sounds right. So they just kind of wanting to get rid of that rapid  thing to put across the idea that you don't need to jack people open really, really fast.  That's not necessary. But he was saying that with a piezoelectric surgery that he can go in  and kind of cut through the mid-palatal suture as an orthodontist. So no throwing shade on  my orthodontic colleagues here, but it must not be that big of a deal because orthodontists  are pretty far away from surgical type of procedures and anesthesia and stuff like that.  Typically, not all orthodontists, of course, but your average orthodontist.  [0:11:43]  And this guy's doing this procedure as part of this mini-implant placement stuff that he's  doing, too. So obviously, he's getting very comfortable with more surgical type roles. Nev -  ertheless, we're kind of talking about this. And that is something that they can do. And they  can, the younger you are, the more plastic you are, the more they can expand things. But  the mandible is a lot harder to deal with, right? We can't just put in some sort of device and  expand that mandible. And so we tend to focus on what we can do. If there is no solution,  there's no problem, okay, has been said. And if there is a solution, then sometimes we kind  of look for the problem that our solution is going to be helpful for. Now, back to this slide,  though. Would orthognathic surgery be the ultimate expansion treatment? And maybe it's  not the ultimate because some of these MARPE, MISPI type of procedures now are affect -  ing actually the cheekbones, too. And it's not just the maxilla, but because they're not cut -  ting the maxilla with a Laforte procedure, they're able to expand the whole midface. Okay,  so that's kind of cool.  [0:12:54]  So maybe this isn't the ultimate. But in general, orthognathic surgery, the movements are  going to be pretty big. So not uncommon for 10, 15 millimeter advancement of the upper  and lower jaw, which is going to have a rather dramatic difference on the airway, right? So  this study that came out in 2019 is a little concerning with regard to this. So this is long-  term results for maximum mandibular advancement to treat obstructive sleep apnea. Now,  if you talk to any surgeon out there, they're going to tell you that orthognathic surgery is  very effective for sleep apnea. And indeed, it is. You bring that jaw forward. This is just like  tonsilloidenectomy in kiddos. You get the tonsils and adenoids out. You got a really good  shot that that has resolved the problem for now. And that's a little bit what's going on here,  too, with orthognathic surgery, is unfortunately, those sands of time keep falling. We get  floppier and older, don't we? Can't fight that as much. So yeah, the number of people that  09/01/25   Page   of 4   17

SSC 2.0 - 214: It's NOT Always About the Anatomy  are successfully treated with orthognathic surgery in the short term is really high. But then  what happens in the long term?  Meta-Analysis   [0:14:18]  So this was a Meta-analysis. So they looked at 445 studies, narrowed it down to six that  they put in that met the inclusion criteria. So that represented 120 patients. Within those  120 patients, 31 of them had a reduction in their apnea hypopnea index from 48.3 down to  8.4 after orthognathic surgery. Obviously, a great result. And that was in the intermediate  term. 54 patients showed a reduction in HI from a mean of 65.8 events down to 7.7 in the  long term. Okay, great. This is all looking awesome, right? So intermediate, long, and then  the next one, 35 showed a reduction in HI from a mean of 53.2 events pre-MMA to 23.1 in  the very long term. Then says improvement in sleepiness was maintained at all follow-up  periods. Lowest oxygen saturation improvement was maintained in the long term. Okay, so  the improvement in sleepiness, that's awesome. But the HI, this part that I've got in green  here, 35 of the patients, HI from 53 to 23. So from severe to moderate in the very long  term. Now, here's the bummer, is very long term in this study was greater than eight years.  So how many of your patients would say that eight years or even 10 years is very long  term?  [0:15:55]  Okay, most of our patients as dentists think that everything we do is for the rest of their life.  Okay, if you place a crown on somebody in their 30s, they assume that crown is going to  last forever. And you know what? It usually does. If they take good care of it and stuff like  that. Like I got a mouthful of fillings and because my dentist was a major advocate for ex -  tension for prevention. As a matter of fact, to this day, I'm not confident that I ever had a  cavity in my entire life. But I don't have any grooves or pits that haven't been filled with  amalgam. And they're still there. You know, right? As I'm recording this, I'm 55 years old.  All of those things were done when I was an early teenager, right? So dentistry can last a  darn long time. But when you're talking about breaking people's faces and moving it, they  probably at least think that this is like one and done. Like I'm getting this done, I'm never  going to have a problem again for the rest of my life. And maybe you've thought that too.  And it's just not true.  [0:16:57]  So we need to be careful with how we go about thinking of these expansion procedures.  And I'm talking all of it. So the reason I use this as an example, if breaking your face and  moving it forward 15 millimeters only gives you or ultimately takes you from severe to  moderate 10 years from now, that's a lot different than I've done this and now I never have  a problem again. So we just need to accurately reflect the outcomes with our patient. And  there are for sure people that orthognathic surgery is a good option for them. There are for  sure people that maxillary expansion can be a good option for them. But make sure they  09/01/25   Page   of 5   17

SSC 2.0 - 214: It's NOT Always About the Anatomy  understand that with that, there is likely, it is very likely that their immediate outcome will  be very good because anatomy is the big arrow, right? So that's very good. But they gain  15 pounds, all bets are off. They get 10, 15, 20 years older, all bets are off. Have you ever  seen a patient, and again, if you're a brand new newbie on this, then maybe you haven't,  but if you've been doing this for a while, have you ever seen a patient that was thinner,  square jaw looks like they're cut from marble that had sleep apnea? Yeah, you have. Okay,  so we see this in people with beautiful anatomy can still have it. So there's more at play  here than just, is it big enough?  And Sometimes It IS About Anatomy..   [0:18:37]  Okay, that's what my point is. This is another great study and go into the literature library  and familiarize yourself with this study. Again, a relatively recent one put together by some  ear, nose and throat doctors. I really like this one because they very specifically narrow  down to the where is the obstruction, where is the problem, and then what surgeries could  be done to help this. And they go from the nasal cavity. Now, like I said, there's no specifi -  cally nasal obstructive sleep apnea, but poor nasal breathing can contribute to sleep ap -  nea because of just that change in pressures on the differential on the airway of how the  person's breathing. And remember that most sleep apnea is in. So if there's a negative  pressure and that's caused somewhat by the nasal airway not being large enough, and so  it's easier to have that negative pressure, then they could obstruct more. Okay, the ob -  struction, again, if it was purely in their nose, they're going to open their mouth so they can  breathe.  [0:19:47]  But they go through the nasal   cavity, nasopharynx, bile pharynx, oropharynx, hypophar -  ynx, or an hypopharynx, and bypass the airway, which is the bottom one here, which is  trach. Trach always works, right? So maximum mandibular advancement, as we just talked  about, is on that oro and hypopharynx. So this kind of covers a whole boatload of it. But  here's all the different surgeries, all the different things that they've done. And your ear,  nose, and throat colleagues, and particularly your ear, nose, and throat colleagues that  also do sleep medicine, they understand all of this stuff, right? Here on the oropharynx, we  have tonsillectomy, rapid maxillary expansion, and UPPP. This is a good thing for you to be  aware of, and especially as you're talking to ENT colleagues, because they're familiar with  all these surgeries. And you know why a lot of these surgeries are rarely, if ever, done?  Because they don't work. And surgeons, like you, don't like to do things that don't work. So  be aware of it, be aware of the surgery. People still tend to believe that surgery is a fix. And  with what we do for a living, we tend to think that way too, right? So if you do surgery on a  tooth, you usually repair it, and it's good to go, and we're done.  [0:20:58]  09/01/25   Page   of 6   17

SSC 2.0 - 214: It's NOT Always About the Anatomy  We're not managing that problem forever. But the difference here with the airway is that it's  changeable over time. And that floppy and older thing happens with it. And so whatever we  do skeletally can definitely help, but ultimately soft tissue wins pretty much all the time.  Okay, so check that out. Be more familiar with that study, and I think that'll be really nice as  you are communicating with your ENT colleagues, like I said, if you can kind of throw out  some of these terms and know what genomaglossus advancement is. And, oh man, did  you ever do a midline glossectomy, which means cutting out part of the tongue, and what  was that like? And that this is going to help you if you just read this one paper alone and  familiarize yourself with these terms and stuff, you're going to know a lot about ENT surg -  eries for obstructive sleep apnea. And one thing that always kind of bugs me is when I...  Actually, I teach a course at Spear, or at least as I'm recording this, I am, and they talk a  lot about expansion and various other treatments, and no one ever talks about the surgery  that I had, and I'm not sure why.  [0:22:17]  So the surgery I had, so here's me now, looks just like what you're looking at right now,  right? And here's my before. And so, yeah, I had this little tiny button nose, really couldn't  breathe through it at all, and so I had nasal augmentation, and I got this big, beautiful nose  put on here, and man, I can just breathe gallons of air at any moment there, and I'm fine,  and I don't really have a problem. Okay, yes, that is a joke. However, it's a joke with a pur -  pose. Because think about this a little bit, because it's, again, funny to me how often we'll  have people talking about, oh yeah, we expand the palate and that expanded the nasal  airway and isn't that great and stuff. And it's like, well, okay, sure, but where's the weak link  in this system? So let's say your nares, your nostril, is the small part there. And the analo -  gy I use is, picture in your mind a doorway. Wherever you are right now, is there a door  leaving the room? Look at that door and then think to yourself, okay, if I had 50 people in  this room and I made the other side of that door, the hallway that's on the other side of that  door, the other room that's on the other side of that door, whatever's on the other side of  that door, six times bigger.  [0:23:38]  I just blew that area out, made it huge. Didn't change the door though. So the door is the  door, but I made the other area way bigger. Does that help me get more people through  the door? Obviously not. So be careful with that whole idea of like, wow, I massively ex -  panded the nasal airway. Well, so what? Try taking all your air in through a coffee straw  and see if it makes a big difference on where you hold your tongue, or how you change  your oral cavity when the weak link, when the narrowest part of that system is the coffee  straw. It's not gonna make a whole heck of a lot of difference. Now, people that have nasal  valve issues and stuff like that, you need to address that. But just be smart about this stuff  because sometimes claims are made and we're gonna do all this, we're gonna do this,  we're gonna do that. And if you actually just think through the basic physics that we're talk -  ing about and basic anatomy, you'll be like, nah, it doesn't actually make a lot of sense. I  don't think that's right, okay?  09/01/25   Page   of 7   17

SSC 2.0 - 214: It's NOT Always About the Anatomy  Unfortunate News   [0:24:44]  And speaking of which, and speaking of kind of basic understanding and thoughts that are  really great if they were true, this is a unfortunate story that I woke up on this date. So  March 2nd, 2023 is when this news story was published on CBS News. It was on their  morning show. Yeah, there you go, CBS mornings. And I literally wake up that day to a text  from a good friend of mine who's a sleep ENT doc in Boston. And it's like, hey, did you see  this story? And he sends it to me and it's this. And what it was is it's a kind of an expose on  a woman who played clarinet, I believe, in the New York Philharmonic. I could be wrong on  that, but she was a big deal, accomplished professional musician. And she went in and  she got an appliance called the Anterior Growth Guidance Appliance, or the AGA. And that  appliance, the claims behind it is that it's going to expand your palate. And then your jaw is  gonna change and it's gonna change your airway and your face and it's all gonna be awe -  some, right? Well, unfortunately, in this person's case, and we can debate if things were  done wrong or is poor patient selection or whatever, but it jacked her up.  [0:26:23]  And so her teeth were basically pushed out of the buccal bone and she ended up losing  teeth and it obviously hurt her career because with playing a woodwind, it's a lot about  how you hold your mouth and things like that. It was a really, really, really, really bad story.  And later that night, by God's intervention here, I had already been planned to give a pre -  sentation for our local sleep Grand Rounds. It's very popular in Utah. So we have a Grand  Rounds every week and I was the speaker. And my topic that I had pre-selected and had  been on the agenda for months was expanding your way out of obstructive sleep apnea.  That was my title. And I was prepared to address this idea of you're gonna have somebody  with sleep apnea, you're gonna have a 55-year-old dude like me, and you're gonna ex -  pand their palate and that's going to cure their sleep apnea. And I was gonna show the ev -  idence really against that and show where the idea comes from and whatnot and then talk  about that. And then this story hits that day. Crazy, right?  “It’s O.K. to make a CRAP LOAD of Money!”   [0:27:43]  So that evening that I'm giving the presentation, apparently this story had been very, very  popular in the sleep world that day. And all of the people here in Utah had already been  familiar with this story and even this quote, which is part of the story. They have an ex -  cerpt, a video of, I think his name's Dr. Galella, if I remember correctly, and him saying,  quote, it's okay to make a crap load of money. Okay, this was not a good look for us den -  tists because we got this this dental device was sold to fix patient's jaws. Lawsuits claim it  wrecked their teeth. No bueno. And then we got this guy, it's okay to make a crap load of  money. And they're treating sleep apnea, even though the patients haven't been diag -  09/01/25   Page   of 8   17

SSC 2.0 - 214: It's NOT Always About the Anatomy  nosed with sleep apnea usually, and they're doing all sorts of stuff and kind of crazy. So  this doesn't look great for dentists.  Stanford Study   [0:28:39]  So this study was done at Stanford, and Stanford is pretty pro-surgery. They do lots of or -  thognathic surgery. In my practice in Boise, there were people that would go to Stanford,  and I had one patient that went to Stanford. We still see her. She's a really, really nice lady.  We've been treating her forever, managing her sleep apnea forever with oral appliance  therapy. Beautiful woman. She went to Stanford, came back with orthognathic surgery, and  her HI went from 60 to 30 with orthognathic surgery. Now, she was in her, I think, late 40s,  50s at the time, maybe, and she looked fine. They didn't make her look like a monkey or  something, but she had the orthognathic surgery, and it did reduce her HI. As a matter of  fact, in case I've not said this before, surgical success is HI reduction by 50%. So techni -  cally, that was a success. Now, in your or my hands with oral appliance therapy, that would  definitely not be considered a success. But she had that done. She came back, still had  severe sleep apnea, still ended up wearing an oral appliance, and we still treat her to this  day. Why I share that is not to throw shade at Stanford, but just to say they're pro-surgery.  And if there's something that could be done to have these expansive effects, if you will,  that's non-surgical, I think they'd be pretty excited about that. So they looked at 16 patients  who did non-surgical maxillary expansion for different appliances.  [0:30:10]  So we've got our AGA that that news story was about. So this one right here. And you can  see those pistons on the side that can be activated in order to push that anterior segment  forward. We've got our daytime nighttime appliance, DNA. That's usually paired or could  be paired with the mandibular version of that. And the whole system is a company called  Vivos. So that's that appliance. The ALF appliance, the Advanced Lightwire Functional ap -  pliance. That's been around for years and years and years. And then the MARPE 2. And  again, MARPE, we kind of think of as surgical, but not if you don't cut the palate. Okay, so  this is, even though we've got the implants in there to give it some extra oomph, if you  don't cut the palate, then we're still pushing against teeth. All right. So here's what I said.  The mid-palatal suture did not separate in any of the 16 patients. So all four of these de -  vices did not, none of them separated the palatal suture. The expansion pattern was pure -  ly dental and dental alveolar in nature. It just moved teeth. Lateral dental tipping, thinning  of the labial buccal alveolar bone with gingival recession were noted in 10 of the 16 pa -  tients.  [0:31:30]  That doesn't seem great. Significant mobility of the maxillary anterior teeth due to vertical  and horizontal bone loss was noted in the five patients that underwent AGA treatment.  Okay, that's not cool. So that's the patient we just saw, right? Now the claims of all these is  09/01/25   Page   of 9   17

SSC 2.0 - 214: It's NOT Always About the Anatomy  that it's going to expand the palate, it's going to open your nasal airway, it's going to  change your life, it's going to do all this stuff, right? And here's a point I like to make when -  ever I talk about these types of appliances and particularly Vivos, because that's Vivos'  pitch and has been for years, is if that was true, it's all I or any of my colleagues that teach  in this field would talk about. Why would I waste your time with teaching you about oral  appliance therapy, mandibular advancement devices, things like that, if we could just ex -  pand the palate and cure people's sleep apnea? Right? So it's all I would talk about, ex -  cept it's not true. So the effect that these appliances have are the same effects that  mandibular advancement devices have, because they either attach to another appliance,  like the Vivos system that has, it's basically just an interlocking appliance like any other  interlocking appliance, or if the person is a clencher, if they're not a 1% occluder, if you  give them a little bit more room there, they might bring their jaw into a different position,  and that would have positive effects.  [0:32:57]  But the outcome is not actually directly related to what they think the cause of that out -  come is. It's a different reason that that person is having success. But if this stuff was true,  it's all I would talk about. And even now using Marpe or Mispi or whatever, and doing a cut  in the palate, it's all about the claims, right? It's like, so I'm talking to this orthodontist, and  I'm like, hey, maybe I'll do that just for fun, right? You know, like, just do it, see if I feel dif -  ferent. I got the big old schnoz I had the nasal augmentation surgery like I talked to you  about, but let's see what would happen if it actually changed the, so I'm not going to  change the doorway, but what if I did change the area on the other side of the doorway?  Would that make a difference? Would I feel better? Would I look better? Would, as the  sands of time continue to flow, would that make a difference? I don't know. I'm not too  stoked about orthognathic surgery at this stage of the game, because I don't know that my  infialveolar nerve has 15 millimeters of stretch, and I kind of like feeling my lip.  [0:34:11]  You know, I'm kind of used to it at this point. So I don't love that idea, but the Marpe-Mispi  type of stuff, okay, I'm asymptomatic. I think I'm doing pretty well, but I might. By the time  you watch this, I may have done something like that just for that experience to see what  my patients are going through. And if I do that and it changes my life, I'm like, oh my gosh,  I never knew until I did this until I had an appropriate expansion of my maxilla. According to  the numbers, I'm about six millimeters too narrow in the maxilla between the first molars.  Till I got that six millimeters, I didn't know what life was like. Okay, if I say that, then yeah,  trust me, I will be preaching this from the rooftops and letting everybody know. But so far,  we've treated hundreds of patients that have been down this road. And it's just not, it's not  what's happening. Now, granted, you got to take that with a grain of salt because we would  never see the people that are successful. Why would we?  [0:35:16]  Okay, so if somebody does this and they have a great outcome, why would they come  seeking care with us? So we only see the failures. And that's important for us as doctors to  always remind ourself is our judgment is going to be, it's going to be clouded, one might  09/01/25   Page   of 10   17

SSC 2.0 - 214: It's NOT Always About the Anatomy  say, but it's certainly going to be affected and impacted by our experience. And so if you  see failures, like for example, one of the reasons I'm very anti open joint surgery for the  jaw joint is the three patients that I've had in 27 years have open joint surgery, one of them  being a replacement of her bilateral joint replacement. All three of them were worse after  surgery. And this was sending them to one of the considered best surgeons in the world.  That's not awesome. Okay, now who knows? Maybe if I would have sent 10 more, the next  10 would have been great. I don't know. But those three have guided my pathway for the  rest of my career to be like, all right, I don't ever want to send anybody for surgery if I can  stand it. So the same thing is going to play into this.  [0:36:26]  You may be watching this like, yeah, Jamison, I've used that appliance and I thought it  worked great or the patient had a good outcome or whatever. Cool. Just don't make claims  that it's going to be permanent because if moving the jaw forward 15 millimeters with or -  thognathic surgery isn't permanent, do you think moving it two millimeters, three millime -  ters, four millimeters laterally and a few millimeters anteriorly think that's going to make a  big difference forever? I don't think it is. Okay, so just kind of think that through.  One Dentist Experience   [0:35:54]  This was a member of Spencer Study Club who sent me an email and she was using one  of these systems that was just described. And she said, this is what I found out so far. This  is a direct quote from the email she sent me. Some blew their buccal bone plate and  needed perio surgery. Tooth mobility has been recorded. Some needed endo. Some have  cracked teeth and needed implants, but they could breathe better. It's kind of rough. Some  have been left with an open bite. No previous information that this could be a side effect  was given a priori because, quote, it is not about teeth. They are not happy patients for  sure.  [0:37:34]  Some found the protocol too exhausting and just quit and I never heard from them again.  So I emailed back this dentist and I said I'm so sorry that you've had these negative expe -  riences. And by the way, your list there of people who have had these negative side effects  with this one magical appliance that you're using, your list is longer in the three years  you've been doing this than my list is in over 25 years of doing this. And oh, by the way,  this is all I do for a living. So this dentist is a real dentist that does this too. So choose  wisely, my friends. You can kind of be on the safe side and help people immensely. Or you  can go on the side that sounds fabulous. But the old adage, if it sounds too good to be  true, it probably is. Now, granted, are there going to be outliers? Absolutely there are. And  I guarantee you there are people that have had things done and it's changed their life and  good for them. That's awesome. And I love that they did have a great outcome. But there's  also going to be people on the other side of that curve.  09/01/25   Page   of 11   17

SSC 2.0 - 214: It's NOT Always About the Anatomy  [0:38:51]  And I don't know that I want to be there when these people have their teeth falling out and  can't do their job anymore of being a concert clarinetist and stuff like that. Okay, so be  careful with that. And speaking of which, let's talk about this thing because I find that this is  something that we don't necessarily get. So as dentists something that you've heard me  talk about before, but note that in this skull right here, okay, what are those things doing  right there? Those teeth? They're together, huh? Okay, so the teeth are together always  and all drawings and everything else. But if I was to ask you how much time should we  spend with our teeth together, you are at this point going to say, well, 1% is about 1% oc -  clusion. And before that, you may have said, well, never, like I get that from dentists all the  time, or say very little. Okay, so there's not too many dentists rolling around out there  thinking that it would be normal for a patient to have their teeth together all the time, right?  So now let's go to sleep. And we're going to be head back,  [0:40:00]  Right, if we are sleeping. So here's the point. If the teeth aren't held together, then the  mandible will fall back. Is that reasonable? Okay, what else would keep the mandible for -  ward if the elevator muscles having the occlusion help don't keep it forward? Lateral ptery -  goid? So is the patient just going to contract their lateral pterygoid to hold their jaw edge to  edge all night long? Unlikely. In REM sleep, are they going to do that? Is the lateral ptery -  goid one of the muscles that the body keeps active, like the heart and intercostal muscles  for breathing and stuff like that, while all the other muscles lose their tone? Not likely.  Maybe. I don't think so. So bottom line, if the teeth aren't holding the mandible in position,  it's going to fall back. So the mandibular position is not dependent on the maxilla.  [0:40:59]  So once again, if I decide, let's say I do the MARPE, MISPE procedure, whatever, and I'm  like, hey, orthodontist really ticks me off that the orthodontist I went to when I was a little  kid had never seen a premolar that he liked, so he extracted four premolars and pulled  everything back, and I got the big teeth with the little mouth and all that stuff that we were  told in the '80s. And so, dang it, I want those back. But you know what? If a little's good, I  think more is better, right? And they took my wisdom teeth out too. So I should have 32  teeth, and I've got eight less, and that pisses me off. So I want all those back. Okay, so  what I'm going to do is I want you to put in two premolars and make them a little pretty big,  right? So give me a little bit extra space there. Then we'll figure out what to do with the  mandible because I know that's harder for you. But that maxilla, you can just blow me out  here, and let's put in a boatload of teeth and just really, really give me a big old maxilla.  Could I still have sleep apnea at the end of that? They do all the stuff. They expand me  out. They put in four implants. Could I still have sleep apnea? I could. Why? Because the  sleep apnea is the base of my tongue, blocking my airway.  [0:42:23]  It's not my maxilla. And if it cured my sleep apnea, it would be because I was holding my  mandible up into that bigger maxilla, or I had more tongue space. So there's the caveat to  this is maybe some of these people, when you expand that, maybe it does give their  09/01/25   Page   of 12   17

SSC 2.0 - 214: It's NOT Always About the Anatomy  tongue a little bit more space. And again, my tongue doesn't have a lot of space, right? I  think it's adapted to it. I seem to be doing all right, I think. But maybe if that room was big -  ger, then my tongue would not fall back and block my airway. Maybe. Not sure. But that is  the idea, right? So don't think that it's all about the mandible being in that and blocking  that. There's a possibility that the tongue could come forward in a different position. But  then even that argument tends to be tough to argue because then we have REM sleep,  and that muscle is going to relax regardless, okay? And it doesn't matter if it's wherever it  is, right? And also, tongue-retaining devices haven't been shown to be crazy effective. If  tongue-retaining devices just brought the tongue forward, literally out of the mouth   forward,  okay, what a tongue-retaining device does with that bulb? Those would be 100% effective  if it was all about that tongue space, because that takes it completely out of the oral cavity  and gets it out of the way. Well, this darn thing can still fall backwards, and that base of the  tongue, which is not affected that much by sticking my tongue out, can still block the air -  way, darn it.  [0:44:09]  Okay, if it was so simple as just tongue space, tongue-retaining devices would be all we  would do. Why would we have ever moved to mandibular advancement devices? Why  would we grab stuff onto the teeth and cause potential side effects of that if all we had to  do is suck the tongue forward? Okay, so, bummer. I wish it was all about the tongue, be -  cause then that's all we'd have to do, and that'd be an easy story too. Or we could expand,  and that would then take care of it for some people. Okay, so think this through. The big -  gest goal I have for you being a member of Spencer Study Club is learn to think. Learn to  ask these questions. Learn to go through, well, what is actually the problem? Does that  even make sense that that would have a proper effect on the problem?  Gilles Lavigne Study   [0:44:56]  And we all know this study. I've referenced this a million times with the original Gilles Lavi -  gne study of, hey, you put an eye card in, and that can make the airway, or that can make  their sleep-related breathing disorder worse. And why? Why would putting an upper night  guard make the airway worse? Well, the American College of Prosthodontists, when they  wrote their paper up, they quoted from that Gilles Lavigne paper, and starting right here, it  was suggested that the mechanism of increasing the severity of OSA could be related to a  reduced upper airway size, oral cavity size, due to the restriction of the tongue space and  the rotation slash anterior translation of the condyles. Okay, so let's take those one piece  at a time. So if you use the night guard, could that make the tongue space a little smaller?  Yeah. So that one, all right, I'll buy that. So if the patient was used to plastering their  tongue up against their maxillary teeth and holding it there, and now you've made that  smaller by a couple of millimeters, is that theoretically possible that that could make their  tongue go back a little bit and obstruct their airway more? Yep, that is.  09/01/25   Page   of 13   17

SSC 2.0 - 214: It's NOT Always About the Anatomy  [0:46:05]  Okay. Now, theoretically, they could also have opened a little bit and their tongue could  come forward, okay, with our regard to that maxillary appliance being there. But none -  theless, we could have an anatomical argument of why that would be. So I'll buy that. That  last part of the sentence, though, is a rotation slash anterior translation of the condyles.  What does that have to do with anything? How would that maxillary appliance cause a ro -  tation slash anterior translation of the condyles? And that might be confusing because  you're like, well, if condyles are anterior, that'd bring the whole jaw anterior. What they're  talking about is the jaw actually rotating kind of backwards. Okay. So rotating a rotation  that's causing a restriction of the airway. When would that happen? Okay. Think that  through. When would that happen if I had a maxillary night guard? Only when what? Only  when the teeth are touching against it. If the person did that before, if they just relaxed and  their jaw rotated backwards, well, it's still going to do it with the night guard. That would not  change. So the only people that that effect would occur in are people that are used to hav -  ing their teeth together.  [0:47:20]  And now that increased vertical makes it so that this collapses their airway to a degree  with their teeth still on it. Okay. Understanding this kind of stuff can really help you figure  out what's going on with patients as you treat them empirically in this field. And again, to  reteach that, so empirically means you are doing things based on their symptoms and then  you're seeing what happens and then you're making decisions based on that. And this is  the world of sleep and TMD. It's not that straight cut answers of the surgical world that  you're used to living in. Hole in the tooth, fix hole in the tooth, we're good to go. You will  treat people. You will do stuff. You will, like I had a dentist in the Facebook group the other  day who's like, yeah, I'm going to add a basically an NTI to the front of my EMA and quote,  that will stop me from clenching. And I wrote down on the reply, I'm like, will it? Why would  that stop you from clenching? Why would putting a little piece of plastic on the front of the  appliance stop you from clenching? Okay. And she then kind of thought that through.Does  it stop you from clenching to put a little piece of plastic somewhere? No. What does it do?  If you clench on causes a mechanical disadvantage, right.  [0:48:49]  So if   you give someone an NTI and they're like, well, I didn't make any difference at all.  What did you potentially learn? They're not a clencher, right? And you could like look at it  and see if there's any marks on it and stuff like that. And your evidence and their report  would say, hey, I thought this person was clenching their teeth and that's why they had  temporalis headaches. Seems like they're not. And then you would go down a different  road. Okay. If you understand this whole 1% occlusion thing and always are thinking about  that, when would that actually do something? If I had these buttons here these pads, these  vertical pads, if I change the vertical, if I did this, if I did that, when would it actually have  an impact? Who would that make a difference with? And the answer is usually going to be,  well, someone with their teeth together a lot. Okay. Well, why are their teeth together? And  that's a harder question. So there are lots of things that can cause bruxism as we've talked  09/01/25   Page   of 14   17

SSC 2.0 - 214: It's NOT Always About the Anatomy  about before. But that's a question we should be asking when you do something and the  patient's like, oh my gosh, eureka. So if you gave somebody an NTI appliance and they're  like, dang, headaches gone, oh my gosh, this has changed my life. Yeah, awesome. Gold  star to you. But that means they are clenchers. So the etiology of their problem still re -  mains. You've just made it harder. Okay. You've just made it harder for them to have  enough muscle contraction to cause pain. Their problem is banging their head against the  wall. You gave them a helmet. Good. They needed a helmet. That banging their head  against the wall was bad. Why are they banging their head against the wall? Okay. Always  go back to that.  So is the Farrar Style Night Guard the Answer?   [0:50:24]  So as a Farrar Style night guard, the answer, like, is that going to keep the airway open?  Think about it. When would a Farrar Style night guard with that little rampy thingy do  something? When would it have an effect on the airway? When their teeth are together. As  a matter of fact, with a little rampy thingy here, you could make an argument that that  takes away tongue space. Because the tongue could be up on the incisal edge and now  that we put that little ramp there, it can't go to the incisal edge. So maybe it's going to be  negative on the airway. Now, in my experience, a Farrar Style night guard works tremen -  dously for a lot of people. Well, the lots of people that we tend to see are not 1% occlud -  ers, are they? These are people that spend a lot more time with their teeth together. So in  that case, it does stabilize their mandible from falling backwards because they spend so  much darn time with their teeth together. Okay? And then we have to ask, well, why is  that? Okay, I hope that little tangent and tirade helps you a little bit. Always be coming  back to that, that one percent occlusion principle. Is that really true? How does that work?  When you go to the courses and they're like, oh yeah, if you do this, it's going to change  your lives. You know, you got to ask some questions there. Well, curious, doctor you say  this, but how many people have you treated? That Dr. Galella dude, when it like came out  in court and stuff like that, I think like he had treated something like a thousand people to -  tal, which is nothing bigger.  [0:51:47]  Like my practice does that in a year. And I mean, just this last month, our practice like  started 152 people. Okay, so thousand? total? lifetime? give me a break. That's just not  enough to really know what, now again, don't take that wrong. If you're getting started, a  thousand sounds like a lot. I understand that. But for someone out there teaching these  things and like making huge claims, maybe you should have a few more under your belt,  have a bunch of people out there doing it. And that's just not enough. So lots of times, sor -  ry to kind of share this story, but I feel compelled to share this story with you real quick.  Years ago, an appliance came out called the Narval and it was the first nylon appliance.  And it was really nice and is made in France. And they came to the Academy of Dental  09/01/25   Page   of 15   17

SSC 2.0 - 214: It's NOT Always About the Anatomy  Sleep Medicine meeting and put on a little extra kind of sales show for people. And I was  invited to attend that. And I was sitting there with other kind of educators and stuff like my -  self, people in the field who had treated lots of people.  [0:52:57]  And they had a couple of dentists that had come over from France to talk about the Narval  appliance. And they are going through this stuff and how awesome it is and everything.  And then they opened it up to questions and someone asked about side effects. And this  one doctor was like, oh yeah, we haven't really seen any side effects and haven't seen any  of these problems and blah, blah, blah. And then someone finally asked, well, just curious,  doctor, how many people have you treated with this appliance? And the doctor very proud -  ly said, oh my goodness, yes, I'm so glad you've asked that. I've treated 12 people with  this appliance. And the way she said it was like, whoa, like 12 people. And I had an idea  that that could be the case because I've taught in Europe a bit. And in Europe, they tend to  be really advanced with aesthetics and stuff like that and no clue with anything sleep and  TMD. And I remember there was like a German dental sleep medicine society and I talked  to one of their big deal people and I think she had treated like 30 people that last year.  [0:54:06]  Now I was there too, once upon a time 24 years ago, 25 years ago, I probably treated 30  people in a year. Last month, we did 150 people. So this doctor being like, yeah, wow I've  treated 12. And being like super proud of that, most of us in the room had treated that  many people in the last week. And so we're like, okay, we are really not going to believe  much anything that you have to say because you just don't have enough reps yet. Okay,  so make sure when you're out there that you're thinking these things through and that you  also test things for yourself. Speaking of which, and you may think this is nuts, but this is  just, this is the guy I am. I have worn a DNA appliance. I have worn appliances that are in -  tended to move things. I have moved my teeth until there were spaces opening and things  like that. It was all tooth movement. And here's a fascinating aspect of it.  [0:54:59]  Now you may say, well, Jamison, why would you do that? Because I, again, if that stuff is  true, it's all I'm going to talk about. I am looking for the best outcome for my patients and  the best outcomes to teach dentists like you. That's my whole life. Okay, that's all I care  about. Outcomes. Is it going to work? So of course I would try. Why wouldn't I try it? It  sounds like a miracle, right? So I do that. Again, I'm the classic midface deficient retronath -  ic, pre-molar extraction dude, right? So all this stuff was meant for me. And I did that with  two of these different magical appliances. Both moved my teeth. And then after a while, I  was like, okay, experiment over. I can't touch my front teeth together anymore. I've got  spaces between my teeth, which I don't love. I don't notice any difference because I never  had a problem in the first place. And I stopped wearing them.  [0:55:47]  Here's the fascinating part. Oh, and both times my bite was weird, which makes sense be -  cause my teeth literally moved. These were not inactive. This moved my teeth. Within a  month or two, bite completely back together.   Exactly where it had been before. So when  09/01/25   Page   of 16   17

SSC 2.0 - 214: It's NOT Always About the Anatomy  they say, when the old-timey orthodontists say that pre-molar extraction is stable, I tend to  believe them as a personal experience from that of my occlusion that is where my or -  thodontist, other than my lower teeth being a little crooked now, but this is basically where  my teeth have been since I was 12 years old. Pretty stable. Okay? All right. And, again,  how much time should our teeth spend together? 1% occlusion. Come back to that 1% oc -  clusion all the time.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 17   17

