SSC 2.0 - 505: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 1  SSC 2.0   Level 5  505: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 1  [intro music]  Sleep & Drugs   [0:00:12]  Hello, and welcome to Sleep and Drugs, part of Level five, our Deep Into Sleep series.  Now let me give you an overview of what these next few sessions on medications and  whatnot and drugs are going to be related to and, and why I even include this. You are go -  ing to be treating a lot of people with oral appliance therapy for their obstructive sleep ap -  nea. You're going to get referrals from sleep doctors, you're going to get referrals from pri -  mary care doctors. And unfortunately, not everyone is going to feel better. Not everyone is  going to have a great outcome with their therapy. Now, most will or those of us who do a  ton of this wouldn't keep doing it. If we had really high failure rates, we probably wouldn't  continue doing what we do, especially because we are dentists and we come from this  surgical paradigm where we really don't tolerate failure. Having said that, this is not a sur -  gical type of thing. This is not like doing a crown or a root canal or even orthodontics  where the outcomes are extremely predictable and the negative outcomes are relatively  rare. With oral appliance therapy, the negative outcome will not typically be though, that  you're going to make somebody worse, but it could be that they just don't feel a lot better.  [0:01:54]  Our job is to mechanically protect the airway when the person sleeps. That's our job. As of  me recording this in 2025, we are pharmacists, and you've heard me use that analogy be -  fore, that we are asked to provide a treatment that has been prescribed, like a pharmacist.  You know, pharmacist gives someone a drug. And yes, the pharmacist may educate the  patient and they may, even in certain circumstances, they may see that there could be a  drug-drug interaction that maybe the physician wasn't aware of. And maybe they'll contact  the physician and say, hey, are you aware of this? And are you sure you want to use this  and stuff? And they'll consult with that prescribing physician.  [0:02:47]  But at the end of the day, the prescribing physician could still say, yeah, I'm aware of that.  Don't worry about it. Just fill the prescription, okay? In my experience, we are treated more  as colleagues in this relationship. We are not treated in the same way that perhaps a  pharmacist would be in that. Just, hey, just fill the prescription that I wrote. That doesn't  tend to be the case. Usually the physicians that we are working with do treat us as equals  and they are leaning on us to make sure that this patient is a client for oral appliance ther -  apy.  09/01/25   Page   of 1   16

SSC 2.0 - 505: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 1  [0:03:25]  But I'm not really talking about the candidacy for oral appliance therapy. What I'm talking  about is the patient that uses oral appliance therapy, has a successful outcome based on  metrics such as apneas and hypopneas, but still doesn't feel good during the day. This is  really what level 5 is getting at, is all these different things that can affect sleep and the  things that we can do to help our sleep and the things that we can do to hurt our sleep and  the things that our patients will do that help their sleep and the things our patients will do  that hurt their sleep. That's what this is all about. Now, as I go through almost all of level 5  too, you will notice a difference in me. And those of you that have been members of  Spencer Study Club know this from watching the original content. I am not a drug guy. If I  attempt, and probably most of the time I won't even attempt to say the names of the drugs  because I'm unfamiliar with them. I don't prescribe medications for patients. And I'll talk  about some of the sleep doctors that I work with and their views on medications as well.  [0:04:44]  And most of the sleep doctors that I work with aren't really big into drugs either. So this  isn't a presentation on what meds to use in the treatment of people who are tired or who  are not sleeping well, problems like insomnia and things like that. It's more a negative, if  you will, presentation on the impact that various drugs can have on sleep. That's really the  take home message, zero goal here for you to be like, oh yeah, okay, now I'm going to  start prescribing this wake promoting medication it in my practice for my patients who  aren't sleeping, that aren't feeling awake well enough during the day.  [0:05:33]  Their Epworth sleepiness scale score is still pretty high and I want them to be more awake  during the day. So I'm going to give them some wake-promoting stimulant during the day.  Yeah, no you're probably not. That in my opinion is bit outside of our realm, outside of our  scope. I just wouldn't want to do it. I don't even care if we want to make the argument that  it's within our scope and that all of this is within our scope and that we should be diagnos -  ing sleep apnea and treating it independently.  [0:06:03]  If you want to make that argument, fine, we can talk about that. I just don't want to, I don't  want to do that myself that is, I mean, if you want to do that kind of stuff, go for it. But I  don't. I am very grateful for the medical colleagues that I work with and they can do all that  kind of stuff. So the bottom line, if you just want to skip this whole thing right here, I don't  think you will. I think you'll learn something. But the bottom line up front, as they say in the  military BLUF, bottom line up front, it's not always about the oral appliance. There's other  stuff going on and medications and drugs can be one of those things. And I think it's help -  ful for us to know some of this as we are helping our patients.  Sleeping Pills   [0:06:52]  09/01/25   Page   of 2   16

SSC 2.0 - 505: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 1  So let's start off with so called sleeping pills, both over-the-counter stuff and prescription  medications that are intended to help people either go to sleep quicker or go to sleep in  the first place or maintain their sleep. Again, some of these things over the counter stuff,  some of these things prescription.  Different Drugs Overview   [0:07:13]  So here's an overview slide on the different, again, so called sleeping pills. I would en -  courage you to do a screen capture of this, maybe print it out, keep it somewhere where  you can reference it and you're going to have patients that are on these medications. And  also, there's always discussion of using medications like this either again to help people  fall asleep, help people maintain sleep, things like that. So it is helpful, I believe, for us to  just be aware of these in general and to ask patients about them and also to have discus -  sions with your sleep doctors. I think it's nice to know where they come from. In my experi -  ence, neurologists will tend to be, they tend to prescribe medications as neurologists. So  they tend to be a little bit more leaning towards medications. Pulmonologists will also use  medications particularly more the wake promoting, not the sleep promoting, so to speak,  medications. So they'll tend to lean more towards stimulants than they will medications  that sedate. I believe that partly that comes from their pulmonology background in that  they are not wanting to suppress or depress the drive to breathe. That makes sense.  Right?  [0:08:41]  Surgeons don't tend to be super duper pro medication either because they tend to be  more anatomy driven. So depending on your sleep doctors, their background and then  also the primary care doctors you work with, primary care doctors, on the other hand, they  tend to move more towards medications. So if you have a patient that is on one of these  medications, it's very likely you're going to be talking to their primary care doctor, not nec -  essarily the sleep doctor. So again, capture this slide here and go through it, but we're go -  ing to go through each of these individually.  Benzodiazepines   [0:09:14]  So starting off with our benzodiazepines. So all the benzos and these have been around  for a long time. And these are referred to as dirty drugs, meaning they have tons of effects  on tons of tissue. So they're not specific. Been around again forever. So these are medica -  tions like Valium is the main medication, the main benzodiazepine that's been around for a  long, long time. Now, back in the day, I would put my patients on low doses of Valium,  more kind of for their TMJ problem and also to help them sleep better. And I'll talk about  this in a second with, as we get to some of these side effects and whatnot.  09/01/25   Page   of 3   16

SSC 2.0 - 505: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 1  [0:10:01]  But the deal with Valium is it works, and it works a little too well as we'll discuss in a sec -  ond. So how do they work? Buying and then forgive me for reading a lot of these slides,  but I want through this, I want also, frankly, a lot of this Level 5 stuff to lend itself to you lis -  tening to, driving to and from work and things like that. This is good content that you can  kind of listen to so that you can hear it maybe multiple times and become more familiar  with it. A lot of the clinical things that we do, all of those things lend themselves to that as  well. The repetition is the mother of skill. So the more you hear these things, the more the  better and the better you're going to understand it. And also that questions are going to  come up as your journey continues because you don't know what you don't know. And  then you come across something, you come across a patient, you come across a case,  and then you're like, oh, okay, yeah, that's what this is talking about in level five. I didn't  really understand that at the time that I went through it the first time. Now I now I do or now  I know enough to ask a question. All right, so forgive me for reading a lot. I know I don't  normally do that, but I'll be reading some of these slides so that it lends itself to you listen -  ing to this in your car and whatnot.  [0:11:22]  So how do benzodiazepines work? They bind to specific GABA receptors, enhancing their  effect. They dampen neural activity to promote sleep, turn down your brain. Some side ef -  fects, risk of dependency and withdrawal, respiratory suppression risk, morning groggi -  ness, risk of falls or accidents. And that top one there is the big one. So this can be addic -  tive, and it's addictive at both a physiological type of addiction, but also just a major psy -  chological type of addiction. And this goes along with the how they work. People that use  these medications, it allows them to get to sleep, it allows them to turn off their brain from  their thinking, their rumination, their worry, stuff like that, and to go to sleep. And some  people are very, very, very sensitive to these medications, more so than others. And you've  seen this with lots of people or you or your own family members, you know this.  [0:12:26]  My wife, Jenny, is very sensitive to medications, so she will not drink caffeine, which we'll  talk about later in this session or in this section. She can't drink caffeine after about 2  o'clock. So like 1 or 2 PM she's like, yep, no, no more caffeine for me, because it absolute -  ly affects her sleep. I'm not quite as sensitive to caffeine with it disturbing my sleep. Vali -  um, if Jenny takes 5 milligrams of Valium, which is a pretty small dose, I'm going to need  to plan to carry her to bed about 10 minutes later because she won't be able to get there  on her own. And that's from personal experience of her being on medications like that a  few times for different surgical procedures or things like that that she's had over the years.  And the doctors would give a small dose of Valium, really as pain medication to relax the  patient and to work synergistically with the pain meds, which are also sedating, as you  would know. So just be aware of that, that for different people, a dose 5 milligrams may  totally knock them out. And for someone else, 10 milligrams, they may not even know that,  that they're using it.  [0:13:42]  09/01/25   Page   of 4   16

SSC 2.0 - 505: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 1  You may use these medications as a dentist for their anxiolytic effects, their calming, their  getting rid of that anxiousness. Anxiolytic. Obviously you know that what that means to  calm them down. And we have done that very infrequently, but it does work. So if you have  somebody that's really nervous about getting PRF, for example, they're just scared to  death of this shot you're going to do in the jaw joint. You're doing an unlocking procedure.  We have had times in the past where we would prescribe somebody two or three Valium,  five milligram Valium. We usually say, hey, why don't you do one at home, you know, one  day to make sure you see how you're going to react. But then we're going to have you take  it about an hour before the procedure. You're going to have someone drive you in. You're  not going to drive on this medication. They're going to be there with you to drive you home.  And that's just going to kind of chill you out a little bit. That can be kind of helpful. All right,  notes. May cause memory loss, maybe because they bind to GABA receptors on neurons  beyond those that are involved in sleep and wakefulness. So some people will not re -  member things if they are on Valium or other benzodiazepines.  [0:15:00]  Okay, so that's it. Long, long history on these medications. For the anxiolytic kind of ben -  zodiazepines were some of the first class of antidepressants. People were put on Valium  for all sorts of things, dirty drugs, lots of different effects, lots of different effects for different  people. Not used as much anymore because there are more specific medications. Still  have their place, still on the market, still used, but not as much as some of these more  specific medications that we'll talk about.  Half Life of Benzodiazepines   [0:15:31]  Talk about some of the half lives of these medications. So I'll stick to Valium, since we've  been talking about that. But then you can see these others here on the slide with Ativan,  Restoril and Klonopin. But Valium, that may surprise you. The half life of 20 to 80 hours.  So acts fast and is in your system for a long time. And this is one of the problems with  medications like this that are sedating is it's not just a, hey, let's get to sleep, or even let's  just have a good night's sleep, so to speak. A sedated night's sleep is maybe a better way  to put that.  [0:16:11]  But this is going to be in your system a lot longer than that. You can see that Restoril and  Ativan have shorter half lives. So those may be used, but they also aren't as fast acting.  So that's kind of problematic as well is the other benzodiazepines. You put someone on it  and it won't act as fast. So then perhaps, unfortunately, they may take more or something  like that because they just don't see that action quickly, whereas Valium is very fast acting  but it's also going to stay in the system a long time. All right, so that's your benzodi -  azepines like this little meme here. “Oh, you believed your doctor when he said benzos  weren't addictive. That's so cute”. So we have to consider addictive in a different way. So I  09/01/25   Page   of 5   16

SSC 2.0 - 505: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 1  mentioned there is likely physiological as well as psychological aspects of this. The psy -  chological would be the big one. Like I said, Valium and medications like it work a little too  well, so to speak. And they really make people feel good and they make people not care  about stuff. Right? So that anxiolysis is, you don't have anxiety about anything anymore to  a degree.  [0:17:32]  You kind of don't care, and that is kind of addicting. Yes. So when those medications get  out of their system, then they do care. And it's not necessarily that they care about stuff  more than they used to or that there's some rebound effect or whatever. It's just by com -  parison. Then they feel more anxious and more having issues with their issues. So be  careful. Again, we almost never prescribe medications in our practice. In general, almost  never prescribed medications in our practice. I checked with Cameron and Kevin, my part -  ners, and they virtually never prescribe medications like this. Again, we did kind of in the  olden days, but really our practices have moved further and further away from the pre -  scription of medications. If we think patients could use some medications, we tend to get  them to people who are going to manage those medications rather than kind of almost like  a typical dental thing of giving somebody four pills or something. And let me know, here  you go for this. You know, one thing, not a problem with that. In your dental practice, you  may do that on a routine basis. And that kind of makes sense. But when you're dealing  with people with chronic sleep disorders or whatever, that's probably not something that  you want to be involved with.  Non-Benzodiazepines   [0:18:54]  All right, let's move into the now appropriately named, or not very creatively named non -  benzodiazepines. So the ones that aren't benzodiazepines, these are usually referred to  as Z drugs. They start with Z, most of them, or they've got a Z in it. So that'd be your zolpi -  dem and medications like that. There's some brand names here that you would recognize  like Ambien, Sonata, Lunesta. Now, these medications are still used quite a bit, and these  are a little bit different and do tend to be more focused on that sleep initiation and improv -  ing, so to speak, sleep. And let's kind of talk about those. So how they work, they bind to a  different GABA receptor subtype than the benzodiazepines. Side effects. These are less  habit forming. Now, note that phrase. So less habit forming, implying that benzodiazepines  are more habit forming and also implying that these are not, not habit forming. So these  are still habit forming, just less. Okay, then some messed up aspects of these medications  may cause sleep driving or sleep eating.  [0:20:14]  We'll talk about this more in a second. So it's not just sleep driving or sleep eating, but all  sorts of crazy stuff that people may do on these medications that they have no recollection  of. And this is while they're, so sleep driving and sleep eating, meaning they are awake, so  09/01/25   Page   of 6   16

SSC 2.0 - 505: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 1  they're not driving their car with their eyes closed. Okay, that'd be pretty miraculous if you  could do that. They are awake, their eyes are open, they're doing stuff, but they just have  no recollection of it at all because they're kind of asleep while they're doing this behavior.  Okay. Some of the notes there efficacy may be close to placebo and chronic insomnia. So  these medications didn't seem to make that big of a difference for insomnia. And there  does seem to be a pretty strong placebo effect with them. And that's something also to  keep in mind if you are more interested in going down the rabbit hole of some of these  medications. More and more it seems that the more we learn about some of these various  medications, it's like, huh, those don't seem to have that powerful of an impact as we  thought they did.  [0:21:20]  So that's, I think that's something also, by the way, that patients are becoming more astute  of and attuned to, is getting a bit away from medications. I think frankly to a degree, the  pandemic and beyond have had an impact on that of people being a little skeptical of like,  oh, okay, medications are going to cure everything and just a pill for everything. That's go -  ing to be how it works. And people are a little bit shying away or shying away from medica -  tions. I think that's good overall. Okay, so these are the benzodiazepine.  Half Life of Non-Benzodiazepine   [0:22:00]  Look at some of those half life. So here you now see that significant lower half lives. And  that's the whole idea of these medications is we can give you something, help you go to  sleep, not have it in your system forever. So Ambien, the half life is two to three hours. And  I again remember working with one of the main sleep doctors I've worked with in my ca -  reer and he would talk about taking an Ambien if he was on a long flight or something like  that, or a Sonata to take to help him go to sleep or if he wanted to kind of shift his circadi -  an rhythm when coming into Europe or something like that, or again wanted to go to sleep  on a plane so that he could wake up in Europe.  [0:22:49]  Let's say when you do stuff like that, you leave the States and it's not time for bed yet and  then you fly for depending on where you're leaving from, might be an eight-hour flight and  then you're going to get there at 8 AM and to make yourself go to sleep in the afternoon is  tough. Right? Because you've got that circadian rhythm in. So that's some of the indica -  tions for these medications is help people get to sleep but then not have as many of those  side effects of the more dirty drugs. Non-benzodiazepines are effective in inducing sleep  and reducing anxiety. Non-benzodiazepines generally have a good safety profile with side  effects like dizziness, headache. Daytime sedation being less common though than with  the benzos. Z drugs contribute to fall risk through orthostatic hypertension, dizziness and/  or imbalance, sedation, muscular weakness, ataxia, et cetera. So this can be tough with  older people who are at risk for falls and then the complications of those. While generally  09/01/25   Page   of 7   16

SSC 2.0 - 505: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 1  considered to have a lower risk of dependence and withdrawal than benzos, they can still  cause rebound insomnia and withdrawal symptoms upon discontinuation. Okay, so not  without their problems.  [0:24:03]  So this is an old video, but if you aren't aware of this, this will be kind of new to you. And  this side effect, if you will, has not changed. So Ambien is still Ambien. Even though this  video is from quite some time ago. Ambien hasn't changed.  [video playback]  [0:24:22]  Female Reporter:   All right, now a warning for people who take Ambien. A government re -  port out this morning reveals dangerous side effects with the popular sleeping pill and its  generic versions. Between 2005 and 2010, there was a 220% jump in visits to the emer -  gency room. Dr. Holly Phillips is with us. Good morning doctor. So we've been talking  about this new warnings about Ambien and now this record visit to hospitals. Why is that?  Dr. Holly Phillips:   You know, Ambien and of course its generic version, zolpidem, they are  so prescribed, meaning outrageous numbers. You know, 44 million prescriptions were filled  just last year, so we have to assume even many more were written. So I think what's hap -  pened, what I find in practice is that both doctors and patients now think of the drug as not  serious just because it's so common. A lot of patients say, oh, you know, I'll just take an  Ambien. But it is serious, especially for women. Just in January, the FDA actually de -  creased the dosage for women by half.  Female Reporter:   Why women?  Male Reporter:   It affects women.  Female Reporter:   Yeah, go ahead.  Male Reporter:   It affects women different than men.  Dr. Holly Phillips:   It does. It really has to do with metabolism in the liver, and it stays in  our bloodstream longer. Two thirds of those ER visits were actually in women. And, you  know, the other group that runs into trouble are the elderly, primarily because they're more  likely to mix Ambien with other drugs.  2nd Female Reporter:   I take Ambien when I'm traveling overseas. What sort of bad reac -  tions do people have?  09/01/25   Page   of 8   16

SSC 2.0 - 505: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 1  Dr. Holly Phillips:   Well, some of the ER visits involved things like hallucinations, behav -  ioral changes, things like agitation, and then the more bizarre side effects like sleep dri -  ving, sleep walking, sleep eating, where you're in this sort of half state of sleep, but you're  also awake and functioning.  Female Reporter:   This is not funny, but I mean, someone I know said they ate a whole  cake after taking an Ambien pill. I mean, they just kind of blacked out after it.  Dr. Holly Phillips:   It’s true. People really are experiencing some severe side effects.  Female Reporter:   But is that something wrong with the drug or they're taking too much of  the drug or just people have different reactions to the drug?  Dr. Holly Phillips:   You know, what I think it is is a lot of it has to do, 50% of the ER visits  had to do with mixed the drug with other drugs. So you really can't take it if you're taking  any pain medicines, any anti-anxiety medicines, or don't mix it with alcohol. But really, I  just advise we follow this mantra. Take the smallest dose possible for the shortest amount  of time. It's not a drug to be used every day.  Female Reporter:   Thank you, doctor.  [end of video playback]  [0:26:43]  Dr. Jamison Spencer:   So there you go. And you may be familiar with some of the stories  of, there was a classic story of someone doing sleep surgery. So a surgeon comes in and  starts to go through the process and everything. And eventually one of the aides, one of  his scrub nurses or whatever, like shook him, took him away from the procedure because  he was doing completely the wrong procedure. And there were story after story after story  of people having these problems on Ambien. Now, the doctors kind of comment there at  the end of the smallest dose possible for the shortest time possible. Good luck with that.  Right? So again, if you are disciplined and to take a medication like this, if you're going  overseas, we need to change your circadian rhythm or whatnot, then okay. But the prob -  lem is these medications do work on some people and then they quickly become to where  they will have this insomnia that gets into this psychological realm of, well, I can't sleep  without Ambien. I can't sleep without taking a Sonata, which is back from the benzodi -  azepine days too. People just felt like, well, I couldn't do this without the Valium.  [0:28:04]  Okay. And same thing's when we talk about alcohol and things like that, people will quickly  kind of make this connection of, I can't do this without this. Same thing with coffee that  we're going to talk about in caffeine.  09/01/25   Page   of 9   16

SSC 2.0 - 505: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 1  Orexin Antagonist   [0:28:15]  Let's move on now to the orexin antagonists. So orexin antagonists. I'm less familiar with  these medications like Belsomra. And so how these medications work is they block the ac -  tion of orexin. So that's the antagonist part. So that's the neurotransmitter in your brain that  promotes wakefulness. These are turning off orexin is that's the goal of these medications.  So how they work, they block receptors for orexin, a wakefulness promoting neurotrans -  mitter. The side effects, hallucinations. As sleep begins, vivid dreams reported more than  with placebo and somnolence. Okay. The tiredness. That's not cool, right? Hallucinations  and vivid dreams. And lots of times the vivid dreams don't tend to be awesome dreams for  some reason. They tend to be scary dreams and whatnot. I don't know that everybody un -  derstands that completely. Although I have a friend that has a theory on that. I'll go and  throw that in right now.  [0:29:23]  So a sleep doctor friend of mine believes that recurring nightmares, so this is the classic,  you're at school, you're in class, and all of a sudden you realize you're naked or something  like that. There's, he believes and as a sleep doctor who had practiced long time when he  told me this, that that is the brain's effort to wake you up, that he saw this a ton in people  with sleep apnea, that they would have these recurring nightmares. And again, his theory  was that was the brain going to the recesses of your mind to be like, all right, this has  worked in the past to wake this dude up. So let me run that film again. That'll wake him up  for sure. And let's get this breathing thing going again. So that's a possibility. It's not posi -  tive of why that is, but it does seem... It's rare that you hear that these medications are  causing people to have really wonderful happy dreams for some reason. Notes designed  to mimic narcolepsy. So that's interesting, isn't it? So this is having the goal of somebody  just immediately going to sleep. Doctors are watching for cataplexy-like symptoms at high -  er doses where people just kind of, you know, can't function with higher doses.  Half Life of Orexin Antagonist   [0:30:41]  Half life of the orexin antagonists are roughly, so the top one there 9 to 13 hours and then  a couple 17, 8 hours. So kind of in that, in that realm, some a little bit longer half life than  others, but not short like the Z drugs, like the non-benzos that are really kind of short act -  ing, these are longer acting. Perhaps one of our problems here too with that rebound ef -  fect, if you will, of them being., well, not rebound effect, but them being tired longer be -  cause it's blocking that wakefulness neurotransmitter. So some quotes from a study. You  can read the title down here. So this is kind of pro orexin. So it's talking about normalizing  sleep architecture in old age and disease. So remember, I'm in general, I'm not a drug guy,  but there are places for medications and places for where medications can help people.  And again, perhaps in certain cases, this is where we always got to take our evidence-  09/01/25   Page   of 10   16

SSC 2.0 - 505: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 1  based literature kind of approach to stuff, our evidence base and then take it to the N of 1.  We're always treating individuals, not stats. And this applies to everything.  [0:32:06]  So we take all of this information that I'm giving you and that you're learning in your jour -  ney with sleep and TMJ problems and stuff like that. But then we really boil it down to indi -  vidual, what this person in front of me right now, how does it apply to them? So anyway,  here's kind of a positive take on this, if you will. So some quotes from that study. Orexin  receptor antagonist efficaciously promotes sleep. And in contrast to most hypnotics, ben -  zodiazepines and whatnot produce all components of healthy sleep architecture, including  preserving or even increasing REM sleep. So that's nice. This is something with a lot of  these medications that while it may make someone sleep, their sleep architecture is  messed up. So they sleep longer, but they don't have the good REM sleep, they don't have  the good deep sleep, stuff like that. And we all know how important that is. Just last night,  as a matter of fact, my sleep was shorter than normal, but my REM was huge. And so I  feel fabulous today, mentally sharp. I'm good, I'm right here with you, and even though my  sleep was shorter. So you could have a medication that screws up that sleep architecture.  [0:33:19]  And as you know from personal experience, I'm sure sometimes you can sleep longer,  your sleep architecture screwed up and you don't feel very good that next day. Okay, and  why would this be important? So back to our title down here in old age. Well, in old age, as  you remember, REM sleep gets reduced and can start to have a problem. Deep sleep gets  reduced. We have more stage 1 sleep, we have more stage 2 sleep. Deep sleep and REM  sleep start to be affected in older age. And now, we believe that lack of REM sleep can af -  fect Alzheimer's and all sorts of other stuff. So there could be a case for putting someone  on a medication to try to improve some of their sleep architecture. Obviously we would try  everything else non-drug related first, but this is why your sleep colleagues or your primary  care doctors may use something like this. Back to the quotes here. In addition, they show  reduced side effects when compared to traditional hypnotics, again your benzodiazepines  and have no addiction or tolerance potential. That's interesting. So these are non addictive  according to these studies. Orexin receptor antagonists are therefore well positioned to be  transformative in increasing well being in adult and aging populations.  [0:34:36]  So there you go, that's cool. So helping them sleep better and with our concern of them  being sleepy during the day. But again, perhaps in this population it's more important to  focus on the helping them get a better night's sleep with better sleep architecture than the  deal with during the day. And then unfortunately in our older population, we know that this  is probably not the only medication they're on. And then that's where things get extra com -  plicated. And I don't have a slide on this or anything. So just kind of remember this right  now. Remember that almost dang near every study that you ever see, it's medication is  that's the only thing that they are doing. Unless the study was designed to do that like  someone who's taking blood pressure medication plus whatever. And those are less com -  mon than your silver bullet type of studies where they take people that aren't on any med -  09/01/25   Page   of 11   16

SSC 2.0 - 505: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 1  ication. They put them on this one medication, see what happens. That's a lot easier to  study then, and what they won't do typically is you're not going to have a bunch of people  that are on 18 different medications. All of this group is on different, every person in the  study is on a different medication. Then you add your medication and then try to parse out  what the impact was. That's super duper difficult. But that's also called real life, that is  treating that individual. So that gets complicated.  [0:36:11]  And I talked about pharmacists a while back. This is where our pharmacist colleagues can  be really helpful for stuff like this. You might even call a pharmacist sometimes before call -  ing a primary care doctor to be like, hey, got a patient who's on this medication and these  six other medications. Can you tell me anything on this? Is there a possibility of a drug  drug interaction here that maybe his treating physician is missed? Or just like that's in the  literature somewhere that's an outlier or whatever. What do you think? You know, pharma -  cists, they're probably going to be more up on that stuff.  Melatonin Agonists   [0:36:47]  Now let's move on to melatonin agonists. So these are synthetic drugs that mimic that  hormone of melatonin that's in your brain. So this would be like Rozerem and melatonin  itself that is over the counter. You could also get so called pharmacy grade melatonin. You  can get that at the pharmacy. You could get this. You as a doctor could order these phar -  macy grade nutraceuticals, so to speak. So melatonin itself is not regulated, but there are  medications that mimic this as well. So how's it work? As said, mimics melatonin to pro -  mote sleep onset. Selected side effects can reset circadian clock if taken at the wrong  time. So you need to be careful of when you take it. But most people are going to take this  right before bed. And notes, so interesting, only slightly reduces sleep latency. Well, I  thought that was the whole point. So the whole point of melatonin was to get you to go to  sleep quicker. And that's curiously not necessarily the case.  [0:37:51]  So it does reduce your sleep latency, helps you go to sleep quicker, but not as much as  people would think. So once again, how much of that effect is placebo? Do you take mela -  tonin every once in a while? I do. And I have specific thought processes of when I take it.  And it will usually either be a time zone shift and so I've gone, let's say when I'm in the  West. So currently I live in Puerto Rico, but when I live in Utah, right now I'm standing in  Utah in my studio in Utah and we just came in from Puerto Rico.  [0:38:31]  So you know, yesterday we fly from Atlantic Time, which currently is Eastern Time since it's  the summer, and we come here and so this morning, I'm awake at 6 o'clock, right? Be -  cause that would be 8 o'clock in Puerto Rico tonight, theoretically, I will feel. And last night  I felt pretty darn tired at 11 PM when we finally got home after our flying all day, right, be -  09/01/25   Page   of 12   16

SSC 2.0 - 505: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 1  cause that was 1 PM Eastern Time. I didn't take a melatonin last night. But when I typically  will do that is when I go the other direction. So if I am flying, so I'm going to go speak in  New York and I'm living in Utah at the time, then I'm going to want to go to sleep at 10  o'clock, let's say, to try to get good eight hours of sleep in. And that's 8 o'clock brain time.  Right? So, just because I got on a plane doesn't mean that my brain thinks now like, oh,  well, cool, you're in the Eastern Time zone now. So therefore I'm going to shift your circa -  dian rhythm immediately and do this. So I would take melatonin there before giving a talk  the next day to try to help me kind of shift my circadian rhythm.  [0:39:47]  And that works pretty good. Now again, is that some of that placebo? Just because I'm  thinking it through and I'm like, okay, yeah, this is going to help. Now, I don't know, but it  seems to help and it will tend to help me with the turning down the rumination in the brain  and allow me to go to sleep as I go through this routine of here, I'm going to take this  melatonin and this. Now, you may be asking, well, like, how much? One of my sleep doctor  friends says less than 10 milligrams he considers to be less habit inducing or because I've  asked him, I'm like, can people get not necessarily addicted to, but get dependent on tak -  ing melatonin? He says, yeah, they can, but that tends to be in higher doses. So he sug -  gests taking less than 10 milligrams. Now remember, 5 milligrams of one brand may be  actually the same stuff as 10 milligrams another brand. So if you do feel that this is some -  thing that you want to use semi, you know, not necessarily regularly, but like I said, with  some of the travel, you do some travel too. I would get some really high quality melatonin.  [0:41:05]  Like the brand I get is pure and they've got a good track record. Okay, so next note here,  more effective for people with irregular schedules than those with insomnia. So this is  where I use this medication and possibly this could help you, your family members as well.  I do the same thing when I travel. I don't take Ambien and stuff like that, but if I travel to  Europe or to Australia or something like that, then to try to kick my circadian rhythm quick -  er into it, I'm going to take melatonin to get me on that. And sometimes I even start trying  to shift that. Australia is a good example of that. I try to shift even a little bit towards the trip  to where I will go to sleep at a different time to get my body more ready to be on that  schedule. Oftentimes when I go to Australia, it is like, it's almost in and out, which is awful,  right? So you get there, you maybe have one day to recover, then you're speaking or  whatever for a couple of days and you're coming home. That's pretty screwing up your cir -  cadian rhythm because you're really shifting it by basically 12, 13 hours.  Half Life of Melatonin Agonists   [0:42:10]  All right. Half life of these melatonin agonists is short. So melatonin and again says on  here, unregulated half life of 20 to 30 minutes. Whoa. So that is in and out pretty quick.  However, if you, for lack of a better phrase, experiment with this drug, you may find that  09/01/25   Page   of 13   16

SSC 2.0 - 505: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 1  you're a little groggy in the mornings that you take melatonin. I don't always feel that way,  but sometimes I will. And that makes you be like, well, how's that possible? It seems like it  should be completely out of my system by eight hours. Yeah, good. But it could just make  some other differences. So just be aware of that. If you're going to experiment with mela -  tonin, then do it where you can really kind of be logical in your approach and use this  where appropriate. I would not encourage you to just take it every day there. Yeah, I just, I  wouldn't do that. I would not get yourself, even psychologically in a place of like, yeah,  every night I take a melatonin before I go to bed to help me sleep. I wouldn't do that if I  were you. So here's another study talking about using melatonin in "older adults".  [0:43:35]  And let's read some of the quotes from that. As melatonin is used primarily as a hypnotic  agent, there's a concern that it may be associated with sedation and impaired functional  and cognitive performance. There are occasional reports of impaired daytime perfor -  mance, though these mostly occur with daytime administration and resolve with a change  in the timing of dosing. So I don't know who is taking melatonin in the middle of the day.  Maybe they're doing that by accident. Overall, melatonin appears to be a safe medication  in older adults relative to other commonly prescribed medications in this age group, such  as benzodiazepines, antidepressants, antiplatelets, and antipsychotics. Agreed. So if I had  to have my parents or Jenny's parents or something like that on medications to help them  with their sleep or anyone else in my patients, let's kind of broaden it out to my patients,  too. Melatonin is where I would start, is I would not usually jump to. Well, I would never  jump to an Ambien or stuff like that. I would say, hey, have you tried melatonin? And  maybe here's a good brand. Here's the brand that I use.  [0:44:41]  Here's how I use it. And maybe this could help a little bit. Frankly, if you did that and they're  like, whoa, you know, doc, that actually, that helped quite a bit. And say, all right, well, how  are you using it? Oh, yeah, I'm taking it every night. It's really helping. Okay, cool. This isn't  a vitamin necessarily. So why don't you talk to your primary care doctor or your sleep doc -  tor, see if there's something else going on. Okay. We want to, we could maybe use this as  a little bit of a diagnostic aid, because if someone feels they need melatonin every night to  go to sleep, then maybe there's something going on there. This is not something that I or  my sleep doctor colleagues consider a multivitamin. This is not a melatonin deficiency that  you have, and you need to supplement your level of melatonin. So watch out for that. And  that's talking to you, too. If you have this issue that you're taking melatonin every night and  maybe you didn't know, but again, be wary of any of these things that we're using on a  regular basis. Yeah, I'll take a multivitamin.  [0:45:50]  Yeah. There's certain supplements that I take on a regular basis, and those have been  studied forever and make sense to me of why I'm doing it. Something to induce or help  sleep, we're not there yet. Where this is just something that we take every day.  09/01/25   Page   of 14   16

SSC 2.0 - 505: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 1  Antihistamine   [0:46:04]  Okay. Moving to another class of drugs are antihistamines. Now, this is not typically some -  thing that you would immediately think of giving someone to help them sleep, but you  know that these make you sleepy. So that is the point. And this is like Nyquil, for example.  The reason we take Nyquil is because it's going to make us sleep and kind of knock us  out. And that's just a tangent here a little bit. Nyquil's changed over the years. So if you're  my age, Nyquil used to be like 30% alcohol and then also had the antihistamines in it. So it  was alcohol plus antihistamine. And dang, if it didn't knock you out. I remember one come -  dian joking that the reason that the little shot glass... So Nyquil, if you've never seen Nyquil  before, so Nyquil has a little cut, the top of it is a little shot glass, it looks like.  [0:47:07]  And he said that it's one of the only medications that comes with its own shot glass be -  cause it's so much alcohol. And then two, that shot glass is plastic because you take your  shot and you might just drop it on the ground. They don't want glass to break everywhere.  So that's your antihistamine mixed with alcohol. And that can have your double whammy  effect there. Current Nyquil doesn't have as much alcohol in it. And you may have noticed  that if you're like, oh, really? Yeah, that actually makes sense because I remember back in  the olden days, I would take Nyquil and it totally knocked me out and wiped me out. And  now it doesn't seem to have that same effect. Well, it's because it's a different formulation.  All right, so some stuff here on antihistamines. These suppress histamine in the body. That  makes sense from the name divided into two categories based on the mechanism of ac -  tion H1, H2 receptor blockers. Antihistamine drugs are crucial in treating allergic diseases  or allergic reactions, and their effects on the body can vary. H1 blockers help reduce aller -  gic reactions, while H2 blockers regulate gastric acid secretion. So the antihistamines also  class of medications for the GERD and problems like that.  [0:48:15]  Since antihistamines can interact with other medications, essentially use them under med -  ical supervision. Special caution is required for individuals with heart disease, liver and  kidney insufficiency, pregnant women and the elderly. All right, so that's kind of histamines  in general. How they work. Block the histamine receptors and acetylcholine receptors re -  duce alertness. That's the sedative or sedative effect here. Common next morning groggi -  ness is one of the main side effects. Notes found in many over-the-counter sleep aids like  Tylenol PM. So anything that you see with PM in it has an antihistamine in it. Risk of de -  veloping tolerance with regular use. Once again, people that find that they need to take a  Tylenol PM all the time to go to sleep and maybe they're doing that for two reasons. One is  a pain reason that they've got some back pain or other pain problem and then they like the  PM part of it that helps them go to sleep. If they're having to do that on a regular basis,  then we need to be kind of figuring out why do they need to do that on a regular basis. So  classic Benadryl. This is in a ton of different sleep aids and dang near everything that has  PM on it.  09/01/25   Page   of 15   16

SSC 2.0 - 505: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 1  [0:49:25]  Half life of about 8 hours and then Unisom, so that is classic sleeping pill. One of the side  effects that isn't on here that you know from personal experience likely is dry mouth. Dry  mouth with these medications for some reason. Well, not for some reason, but if you have  this in a cold medication and you don't have your nose cleared, then you're going to have  dry mouth plus mouth breathing because you can't breathe through your nose very well.  And that can kind of contribute to crappy sleep as well, as I'm sure you are aware.  [0:49:59]  So that's the end of our section on sleeping pills. And just to take this again to make a  point, if you family member, patient is having to use something on a regular basis to induce  sleep or help you "get a good night's sleep," you need to look into that because none of  these medications are you deficient in. You don't have a Unisom, a Benadryl deficiency,  you don't have a Ambien deficiency, you probably don't have a melatonin deficiency. So  these things can be used smartly and in our patients, I would encourage you to focus on of  any of these over the counter melatonin, good brand that you know is good quality.  [0:50:50]  That doesn't mean that they have to go to the pharmacy. They can. You can send them to  the pharmacy. And by the way, if they pick it up the pharmacy, there's probably going to be  a bigger placebo effect with it. So why not, but just be focused more on that and then  make sure you follow up with the patient because if they're like, yeah, doc, my gosh, that's  making a huge difference for me. Okay, how much you taking it? Oh, every night. What if  you don't? I have a really hard time sleeping. Okay, let's figure out what the heck is going  on, because the problem is not a melatonin deficiency.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 16   16

