SSC 2.0 - 511: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 2  SSC 2.0   Level 5  511: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy  Cases Part 2  [intro music]  Develops Jaw Pain   [0:00:12]  Next is a patient that develops jaw pain. Now, this one's probably going to scare the heck  out of you because you don't feel that comfortable with TMJ problems and you probably  came into Spencer Study Club because you wanted to learn about sleep apnea and then I  throw TMJ stuff at you and hopefully pique your interest and you're taking our regenerative  TMD course and learning how to do PRF and all that kind of stuff. But assuming you don't  have those TMD skills, this will be one that will scare you a little bit.  [0:00:41]  So let's go through this. This is in level two and then some of the level three TMJ stuff  here, but determine if the pain is joint or muscle and usually either joint itself or the mas -  seter muscle with the muscle. Sometimes temporalis, but almost always masseter. Re -  member those things. Confirm that the appliance is protecting the airway. Once again, if  you have a patient that's having a problem, if you were to post this on the Facebook group,  my response is usually going to be, is the appliance working?  [0:01:13]  And so do you know if you are trying to chase jaw pain and you believe that sleep apnea  can cause people to clench, grind their teeth, then wouldn't the most important thing be, is  their airway protected? Is the sleep apnea controlled? If it isn't, then maybe that's the rea -  son for the jaw pain. So check out, is your appliance working? When in doubt, full steam  ahead. When in doubt, go forward. If they are still snoring and they're not feeling well, not  feeling well rested, I should say, then it's move forward. Okay. Patients won't be freaked  out about this. No patient is thinking, but if you move my jaw farther forward, it's going to  make my jaw joint hurt. They don't think that at all. They don't understand why their jaw is  hurting. They're not going to throw at you that it's probably the lateral pterygoid or some -  thing. So if they're snoring or not feeling rested, either one of them, full steam ahead.  Take a Break   [0:02:10]  Now, sometimes you will need to take a break from the appliance and treat the problem. In  my experience, both personal experience and treating patients with this, it's usually some -  09/01/25   Page   of 1   17

SSC 2.0 - 511: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 2  thing that just comes out of nowhere. So the person has had months and months, if not  years, of success with the oral appliance. Never had jaw pain, doing fine, wakes up with  jaw pain, and doesn't get better. It gets worse. Probably they slept weird. Probably they did  something weird in their sleep. Or they bit on something that caused a problem. They  didn't recognize it at the time that they just had trauma to their jaw. And so it's not getting  better. Although oral appliance therapy, particularly for retrodiscitis, that makes sense,  right? You're putting all this space between the teeth. It's going to translate up into the jaw  joint. So treating a retrodiscitis with an oral appliance is completely logical. Makes sense.  [0:03:14]  Nevertheless, in my experience with dealing with this myself, I took a break from the oral  appliance, got the retrodiscitis better. And then if you remember that story, I went back to  wearing the oral appliance unchanged and did not have that retrodiscitis occur again. I've  had that happen twice, probably 12, 15 years between scenarios there of developing a  retrodiscitis just out of nowhere. So this can happen. And it's, again, probably due to trau -  ma that the patient had during sleeping somehow or something else that they did to their  jaw that they just didn't recognize as trauma at the time.  Refer the Patient   [0:03:53]  Refer the patient to physical therapy to help speed the healing. Physical therapists do a  great job, particularly with muscle pain, but also in level 3, you know, that we can do the  iontophoresis, the physical therapist can, that is, and they're going to bill for it. It's going to  be covered by the patient's insurance. They won't pay probably anything out of pocket. So  that's a good person to have on the team. Plus, by the way, when they go to the physical  therapist, physical therapist almost assuredly going to find that they've got something else  wrong. So they're going to be like, oh, your neck range of motion is a little bit messed up  here. Oh, this is kind of messed up. And the head bone's connected to the neck bone's  connected to the... And they're going to go kind of through the whole thing. So the patient's  going to be like, all right, maybe it's not that oral appliance fault. Maybe it's my fault.  Maybe it's because I'm, you know, 68 years old and because of this and that. That could  be what's going on. That could be helpful to have a physical therapist explain that there's  things connected.  Don’t Blame the Appliance   [0:04:52]  Now, next, don't blame the appliance. And if the pain is resolved, consider going back to  the same position if you know it's protecting the airway. So if we know the appliance is  working, so that scenario I gave you of a person who's been wearing an oral appliance for  a long time and has never had a problem, I wouldn't really mess with that appliance at all. I  09/01/25   Page   of 2   17

SSC 2.0 - 511: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 2  would resolve the retrodiscitis or the muscle pain or the temporal tendonitis or whatever  they're having, and then just go back to use of the oral appliance unchanged.  Sometimes a Day Splint is Required   [0:05:23]  Sometimes a day splint will be required. Now, this is very rare. I'm trying to think of cases  that I've had where I actually put them into splint therapy. That's extremely rare. And  nowadays, it would be vanishingly rare. And more than likely, before I would fit them with a  splint, I would do PRF. So if somebody had significant enough joint pain and it wasn't re -  sponding to the things that we normally do quick, like in days, I would probably just do a  complementary PRF session on them, let them know that that's something that we usually  charge a thousand bucks for, get them in, do that complementary PRF. They're almost as -  suredly going to get better very quick, and then I go back to the appliance. Again, this is a  scenario where the person has worn the appliance for a long time and has done fine. Now,  if their jaw pain has developed quickly in treatment, then it's back to the, is the ap Get to  the etiology of their jaw pain. Don't just use the PRF to mask the problem. They're going to  feel better with PRF, but if you haven't addressed the underlying cause of the problem,  yeah, you're helping, but it's going to come back. That's not going to be cool. And lastly, if  they're not getting better, jaw pain's not getting better, then ask them once again, what was  it about CPAP that you couldn't tolerate, and maybe we're going to get them back on  CPAP.  Has Significant Bite Shift   [0:07:01]  How about the patient who has a significant bite shift? Now, this can be clearly a bummer  too, and in my experience, these folks don't usually know that they've had a bite change.  They go back to their dentist, and their hygienist is like, okay, bite down, and they bite on  their front teeth, and the hygienist is like, no, bite on the big ones in the back, and they bite  on their front teeth, and the hygienist goes and gets the dentist, and the dentist wiggles  their jaw and can't get this person to put their back teeth together, and the person's like,  oh, I had no idea. That is the rule, not the exception to the rule. That is typically what hap -  pens.  [0:07:41]  Now, if you do all the stuff that we talk about, and you use your morning reprogrammer,  and you have them do all that stuff, super rare that they're going to have this problem. If  you do the shim stock for the home, remember that with the little tabs? You can get those  Post-it note flags and give those to the patient, have them bite on it, and see if they can  hold it. You're going to catch things quick. So this is a scenario where it hasn't been gone.  They have a significant bite shift, and what are we going to do about it?  09/01/25   Page   of 3   17

SSC 2.0 - 511: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 2  Number 1   [0:08:13]  All right, so number one, try to get them back in occlusion, usually with something they  wear all day and night, while they go without the appliance. This is the big, big, big key  here, is they can't continue to wear the appliance and think that you're going to get their  jaw back. It's not going to happen, because they're going to be wearing... They're going to  be holding their jaw forward for eight hours, let's say, and if you give them a bunch of ex -  ercises, are they going to do those exercises eight hours? Probably not. So it's logical to  think that, well, if they continue to wear their appliance, they're never going to go back.  That's right. So if you have that morning reprogrammer, you'd have them use their morning  reprogrammer a lot, like many, many, many times throughout the day. If they work at a  computer, they could have that on their teeth, and they're just gently squeezing, squeeze,  squeeze, squeeze, squeeze, squeeze, and they're going to go without their appliance for  days or even weeks.  [0:09:10]  Now let's get a little medical legal here for a second. Who prescribed the oral appliance for  them? Okay. Well, probably their medical doctor, right, or a sleep doctor. So it'd behoove  you, if you want to be real careful here, to possibly contact their doctor. Hey, doc, this pa -  tient's had a bit of a bite shift, the things we've told them to do to avoid that, they didn't re -  ally understand, I guess, and so we're going to be dealing with that. They can't wear their  oral appliance while we're trying to get their occlusion back to where it was before. I've told  the patient that that means that they're untreated during this time. I've told them that  maybe they should consider going back on CPAP during this time. What do you think?  [0:09:52]  And then the doctor may say, eh, you know, they're not going to do that anyway, so go  ahead. Or they may say, well, yeah, let me talk to them and see if we can get them back  on CPAP for a little bit. Okay. Cool. You're going to note that you had that conversation  with the doctor and the doctor's decision. Then you're, if something bad happens, which  hopefully it won't, but you would be covered in that case. I wouldn't suggest that you just,  like, go for it and be like, I'm not talking to anybody about this, you know, I'm embarrassed  or whatever. It's not your fault. Side effects happen with treatments. Doctors, medical doc -  tors know that. They're very, very knowledgeable about side effects. They know stuff hap -  pens. So don't try to hide it. Just, again, you can throw the patient under the bus a bit here,  but then say, hey, we need them to be untreated for a little bit to try to get their bite back.  Number 2   [0:10:41]  Okay. Number two, if the patient couldn't care less about their bite being off, and this is  pretty common, inform them that they may damage their teeth, and maybe you could do  09/01/25   Page   of 4   17

SSC 2.0 - 511: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 2  something to protect their teeth, like give them a splint that they would wear during the day  that would protect their teeth from that banging around on their front teeth.  Number 3   [0:11:03]  Number three, if the patient feels better in the new position but isn't thrilled with their oc -  clusion, then consider phase two. Style treatments or even orthognathic surgery. I've never  had anybody... Well, that's not true. I had one patient go through orthognathic surgery. You  probably remember me talking about this in level two. This is the guy that had moved from  Texas. He had an appliance that he loved, would not consider going without this appliance,  and he was full-on class three, way worse than this picture that I got here, and he ended  up having a Le Fort osteotomy to move his maxilla to match his mandible, and he was re -  ally happy in the end of the case.  [0:11:42]  I've had a few other people that have had a bite shift and their TMJ problem gets better.  They're feeling better, everything's better, and then they're like, you know, yeah, it would  be nice if my back teeth touched. And then we work with their physician, or excuse me,  with their dentist, and crown their teeth. The dentist will crown their teeth and give them a  normal bite in that position. I've told you the story of my wife Jenny. She had a bite shift.  She didn't love her smile. We worked with a member of Spencer Study Club. He did a full  mouth reconstruction on her to that new bite. Okay. So that is something that you can do if  they're happy with treatment overall, but they're like, yeah, this bite thing does bother me a  little bit. I can't eat certain foods, a bit of a hassle, and you have those options of phase  two orthodontics, crowns, orthognathic surgery for massive cases, which is often, as you  know, going to involve orthodontics too.  Marie Marklund Quotes   [0:12:35]  Here's some quotes from a paper by Marie Marklund back in 2019 about these bite shifts  and side effects. I'll go ahead and read this. "Patients who choose to continue long-term  treatment or appliances for sleep apnea are unaware of various types of bite changes.  Such changes will, however, progressively increase in magnitude and be more difficult to  take care of if needed. It is therefore important to continuously follow up with patients in  regard to bite changes. Some changes in dental occlusion might be favorable. Unfavor -  able bite changes may develop in patients who have a normal bite or class III malocclusion  at baseline." And I remember there's been swinging of a pendulum over time in dental  sleep medicine with regard to bite changes.  [0:13:21]  09/01/25   Page   of 5   17

SSC 2.0 - 511: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 2  I tell this story back in level 2, so forgive me for repeating myself, but it's a good story, and  that is Dr. Alan Lowe, who's an orthodontist, and he would speak at the Academy of Dental  Sleep Medicine every year. And one year he came and he's like, oh my gosh, these oral  appliances that we're doing, you know, we're finally doing five and 10-year follow-ups on  our patients, and all of them have tooth movement and bite changes and all this stuff.  We're screwing people up. This is awful. Don't know what we're going to do. You know, this  is bad news. And everybody's like, okay, that sucks. And then the next year we come back  and Dr. Lowe speaks at the conference and he says, hey, we're changing people's bites.  Get over it. And it's like, whoa, okay. Why'd you change your mind? And he was an or -  thodontist, so he kind of cared about occlusion and stuff like that. And what changed was  he decided, well, I guess this is a life-threatening problem and malocclusion isn't.  [0:14:18]  Now, even with that, though, do we need to have bite changes? No, we for sure don't.  There are some people out there in 2025 that are teaching that these bite changes are  positive. I've had arguments with a few people in the field that they're like, hey, well, you  know, if we bring their jaw into a different position and it tends to stay there, that's good.  And I'm like, no, I don't think it is. And I think where they are a little misguided is some -  times there's this thought too that if they have an airway problem at night, they have an  airway problem during the day. I don't think that's true at all. Now, granted, are there a few  people out there that have such a small airway that they indeed do? They're struggling to  breathe a little bit during the day. Yeah. Relatively rare, though, right? So our body wants  us to have an open airway while we're awake. It's open by reflex.  [0:15:15]  Nevertheless, I see the appeal of that idea, and I really see the appeal for people that want  to do full mouth reconstruction. So sometimes they will look the other way of the logic of  that, of like, well, they're not having daytime apnea. I don't know that they need 14 crowns  or 28 crowns in order to change their airway. And remember, too, how much time are they  actually spending with their teeth together? So unless they're going around all day like this,  can't they just hold their jaw forward a little bit? Instead of being here, can't I hold my jaw  here? We talk about vertical being important. Well, wouldn't I just open my vertical a little  bit naturally, which is lips together, teeth apart? I think so, too. So this is going to be pretty  rare that you're going to have people with phase two, but this is kind of just the overall  view of these bite changes. Once again, do what we say, and it's going to be rare that your  patients have bite changes.  Dr. Alan Lowe   [0:16:14]  Speaking of Dr. Lowe, in his statistics, he said 14.3% of patients will not have occlusal  changes. So meaning that basically 85% of patients will. That seems kind of scary, right?  41.4%, so that makes us a little less scary, will be favorable. Well, hey, that's good news.  09/01/25   Page   of 6   17

SSC 2.0 - 511: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 2  So these are people that were class II, division 1, let's say, and they've moved forward  now. All of a sudden, they're class I molar. That's cool. So 48% of the changes are favor -  able. So remember, we have 85% changes. So basically half of the changes will be favor -  able, and then the other half will be unfavorable. So that should make you a little bit more  comfortable. We get... Put all that together. Make easier math here. 15% won't have a  problem, and of the 85% who have the bite change, half of them, it'll be favorable.  [0:17:14]  So if I do the math real quick there, that comes out to around 57.5%, 58% of patients will  either not have a bite change at all, or it will be positive. That sounds better, doesn't it?  Now, keep in mind, though, that that was with the Klearway appliance, which is unique.  There's no other appliance on the market like this. It's basically a monoblock attached top  and bottom. You cannot move in any direction, sideways, forwards, backwards, up or  down. It has ball clasp between all of the teeth. Not all the teeth, but all the posterior teeth.  I think that this appliance has 85% of people having a bite change. Whereas in the appli -  ances that I use, and I never use the Klearway, and neither is anyone else for that matter,  except for the University of British Columbia who owns the Klearway, we just don't see as  many of these. And it's not because we're not looking. We're looking, but we're not seeing  those bite changes.  [0:18:18]  And by the way, with someone like my practice that's been doing this since 1998, we see a  lot of people. We see a lot of follow-ups, hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of patients  a year in follow-up. So if these things that I was teaching you didn't work, we would know  and we would change. We would shift. If you're just barely getting into this, if you're new in  Spencer Study Club and you are new in treating dental sleep medicine, welcome to the  club and welcome to the best time ever to be part of this because so many of us have fig -  ured out so much by guesswork and trial and error and practice, right? That's what we do.  So we're able to give this to you of here's the way to avoid the problems that we've had to  deal with over the years.  Dental Trauma Due to a Bite Shift   [0:19:07]  Now what about dental trauma due to a bite shift? And this can happen. So this is my love -  ly oldest granddaughter, Alisi, and she's missing a front tooth there and that was not due to  a bite shift trauma from her oral appliance, but I just thought it was cute. I want to put it in.  Didn't find another picture of somebody with just like a chipped tooth. But the problem is  they're smacking on the front teeth and front teeth are not meant to have that much pres -  sure. Now you may be familiar with the NTI or with anterior jig, anterior bite planes and  deprogrammers and stuff like that. If you remember doing this in level 3, but in case you  don't remember or try this right now, bite down on your back teeth, feel your masseter con -  tract, bite on your front teeth only. You'll feel less. This is most prominent with your tempo -  09/01/25   Page   of 7   17

SSC 2.0 - 511: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 2  ralis. Anterior temporalis, bite on your back teeth, feel that contract strongly. Now bite on  your front teeth only. You'll feel much less contraction. So we have that going for us that  when they are biting only on their front teeth, they can't create the muscular force that they  do on their back teeth. However, that goes away to a degree at night. However, they're  wearing their sleep appliance at night, so their teeth are protected. So that's cool too. But  overall, if we're just always smacking on the front teeth, that's their primary teeth for chew -  ing, they can break off.  [0:20:33]  And I told you the story before of the woman that this happened to her and she had to  have a bunch of dental work done and her jaw kept shifting. I told you my wife's story that  with her full mouth reconstruction, even after they changed her bite to the new bite with the  crowns and everything was cool, she went back to wearing her oral appliance and she still  struggled to get... Or still struggles to this day to get her bite to go back to that occlusion.  So don't take the blame for it. This is a side effect of treating a life-threatening disorder.  You know, if somebody gets intubated in the hospital and they chip their front tooth, they  don't necessarily apologize profusely for chipping their front tooth as they were saving their  life. They tell them, hey, we're sorry in the process of saving your life, we chipped your  front tooth. Okay? This is you too, that this is part of this. However, before it ever gets to  this point, we try to do all this other stuff. Okay. So number one, don't take the blame. It's  side effect of the life-saving therapy you provided. Number two, try to get the patient back  into their normal occlusion with doing all the stuff. Remember, they got to go without their  appliance, so do that whole thing and consider phase two therapy if necessary.  Few Pearls Regarding Challenging Patients   [0:21:47]  Now let's shift gears a bit and let me give you a few pearls regarding challenging patients.  Please don't throw your lab, your team, your dentists or other dentists in your town, other  doctors, the DME company, CPAP in general, under the bus. You're never going to im -  prove the situation by putting down other people, particularly your team. That's a massive  no-no. And the lab too, by the way, and I bet you've done this. You have somebody with  a... And this can happen in your general practice too. Oh man, the lab, they did a bad job  with this. Okay. If you ever say that... Or like, ah, yeah, we got to get that back to the lab.  This doesn't fit. Okay. That's the lab's fault. We apologize. We're going to send that back to  the lab. They did a bad job. Well, who chooses the lab? Well, you do. So that's... If you are  saying anything negative about anyone else, it really is still your fault.  [0:22:59]  So you should take the ownership of it, but also impress upon the patient that they are a  unique case, that this has never been done before. This is bespoke. Remember me talking  about all this stuff in level 4 and whatnot? Help the patient... You know, throw the patient  under the bus. If you're going to throw anything under the bus, anyone under the bus, you  09/01/25   Page   of 8   17

SSC 2.0 - 511: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 2  throw the patient under the bus. It's the patient's fault most of the time. Don't throw other  people under the bus. Explain that everybody's doing their best and don't throw anyone  under the bus other than your patient. I'll allow that. And you know, you do it nice, but you  do it in like, yeah, you know, because of your super straight teeth, it's really difficult to get  anything to grab there. You know, hey, because of your super crooked teeth, it's really hard  to get it to fit comfortably, even though Darcy's doing a great job with you here. Okay. So  challenging patients, try to bring it back on them, that it's their issue. It's them is why  they're having a problem. It doesn't fit. Hey, what was it about CPAP again that you didn't  like, that you couldn't tolerate? What was it that you couldn't use it? Okay. It's their fault,  right? They can't tolerate it. They couldn't use it. It's not CPAP's fault. Throw the patient  under the bus. Don't throw anybody else under the bus.  Ask the Patient   [0:24:17]  Now this is a little trick, if you will, that I use. And this is one of the main reasons that I love  people trying CPAP first, is I will say, what was it again about CPAP that you didn't like?  Maybe we should get you back to the sleep doctor and try a little harder with CPAP. Okay.  So that's my trick. If a patient is ever like... Not necessarily mean to my staff or something  like that, but you'll get these patients where the staff member gives you a heads up before  you come to the room, like, hey, Dr. Spencer, heads up. You know, Jim is really upset. You  know, he's having comfort issues with his oral appliance. He's having a hard time wearing  it. You know, he's just really upset about it. And what I will do in that scenario is I'll go in  and now granted, as you know, a lot of times patients will be more bold with your staff  members then you walk in as the doctor and they'll be kind of like, Oh, Dr. Spencer, so  great to see you. How are you? And you know, if they're nice and cordial and stuff like that,  then I won't necessarily throw this at them.  [0:25:21]  But if I come in and it's like, Hey, you know, Steve, I was talking to Darcy there. She says  that you're having some problems. Oh yeah. I hate this thing. I can't stand this thing. You  know what? What was it about CPAP again that you couldn't tolerate? We should probably  get you back on CPAP. You will find that they will have a change of heart right there. That  they'll be like... They're like, oh, so you're not going to take this all on yourself. You're not  going to cut me a check and just give me my money back. You're not going to do that.  You're not going to take responsibility for my inability here. And note too, there's a little bit  of a Jedi mind trick here because I'm going back to their failure. What was it about CPAP  that you couldn't tolerate again? Like I'm kind of saying, you're a failure. You failing again.  It's a pattern with you. What was it? Maybe we should try harder with that.  [0:26:13]  Okay. And I'm not doing it in a mean way. I'm just pointing out to them this fact. Now, most  people, they will change their tune right there and be like, oh, geez, compared to CPAP,  09/01/25   Page   of 9   17

SSC 2.0 - 511: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 2  this is a walk in the park. Okay, well, let's work a little harder here. What is it that's bother -  ing you? And usually they will have something that's bothering them. If they don't, then you  go back to the, you know, people that don't like the appliance, that kind of stuff.  Always About Money   [0:26:38]  Now, the vast majority of the time that there is a problem, it's about money. Some famous  doctor probably a hundred years ago said something about if there is a dollar between the  patient and their denture, the denture will never fit. It took me a long time to understand  that. It's like the spacing of a dollar. Boy, it seems like it should fit. But the point of that was  if they owe you money, if they don't get as much money from their insurance as they  thought they were going to, stuff like that, that can massively affect their mentality on oral  appliance therapy, splint therapy, TMJ stuff, all that stuff, right?  [0:27:22]  So try to get all that clear up front. This is one of the main reasons that I strongly encour -  age you to be all in with insurance or all out. When you're all in, you're gonna know what  they're gonna pay, like pretty much to the dollar. There will not be surprises. When you're  all out, you're gonna know that they're gonna pay your fee. That's it. When you get in the  middle, which is stuff like, hey, we'll submit your claim for you to your insurance as a cour -  tesy to you. That patient, they called Blue Cross. Blue Cross said it was covered. Covered  means paid for completely as far as that patient is concerned. And when they come back  and only get 700 bucks and you charge them 4,000, they feel ripped off. So I wouldn't go  there if I were you. Either be all in and know or all out and know and tell the patient, hey,  don't expect to get anything from your insurance here. If you get a few hundred bucks from  your insurance, you should consider yourself super lucky. And then that way, if they get  500 bucks from their insurance, then they should feel super lucky because you told them  only to expect a little bit.  [0:28:28]  So be very, very careful. Stick to the plan. Hold to your guns on this stuff. In my experi -  ence, and I'm sure this has been your experience too in your general dental practice, it's  often about the money. It's not about something else. If you do do something for free for  the patient, make sure they know it. If you just do something for someone and you don't  point it out that that was a gift, then they just expect it. So if you get them back for a follow-  up and don't charge them or you replace something and don't charge them or whatever,  you should point that out. Hey, you know what? We're going to go ahead and send that  back to the laboratory. I think that if they have another go with this, that could help. That  could make a difference for you. Normally, we would charge $600 to send this back to the  laboratory for this. I'm not going to charge you in that case, in this case, because, you  know, you've been a good patient. You're a good dental patient, whatever it is Okay. Don't  just do it because then they would expect it, and then if there's a problem again, they'll be  09/01/25   Page   of 10   17

SSC 2.0 - 511: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 2  like, well, just send it back to the lab like you did last time. So now your gift to them is now  an entitlement. Okay. So make sure they know if it's a gift.  [0:29:46]  Back to insurance. If something does develop with the insurance, make sure that you let  the patient know that you're their advocate and that it's you and them against the big bad  insurance company. Now this is much easier if you are in network versus out of network.  This is much easier if you are completely don't work with insurance because then it was  just between you and them. And, you know, they had the misunderstanding with their in -  surance of what would be covered or what wouldn't be covered. That's on them, not you.  But let them know like, hey, yeah, if you need me to write a letter for your insurance or  something like that, that you can do. So that's not being in the middle. What's being in the  middle is submitting claims for them because what happens is Blue Cross will tell them  that you did it wrong. Your staff did it wrong. They didn't give you the right paperwork. They  didn't submit the right stuff. You don't want to be involved with that at all.  Support Your Team   [0:30:40]  Support your team. If your assistants typically fit and adjust the appliance, make sure you  don't adjust it within view of the patient. This is super duper important. And I said this  probably a hundred times in the Spencer Study Club videos, but everything I teach is due  to experience of doing it wrong. And well, not everything, but most things that I teach it's  that way. And I made this mistake in that I would jump in and do something and then the  patient would be like, oh, that's so much better. Dr. Spencer, you're so awesome. And that  makes you feel good for a second. And then it doesn't make you feel good because that  patient won't see your assistant anymore. That patient will insist on seeing you as the doc -  tor. Oh, I have to see Dr. Spencer. Only Dr. Spencer can adjust my appliance. That's a  pain in the butt. So if you do need to get involved, and as you're a beginner, you will be in -  volved more than once your assistants have done a lot of this. I'm pretty confident that  both myself, Dr. Kuehne, Dr. Mangelson will tell you that our dental assistants are better at  fitting and adjusting appliances than we are. Okay. They have done a thousand times  more appliances than we have. Okay? Because we normally don't need to touch the ap -  pliances. They're better at it.  [0:31:57]  For you as more of a beginner, if you are, then you might be jumping in on more of these  cases. If you do, I strongly encourage you to do this out of the eye shot of the patient so  they have no idea that you did. And then you give the appliance to your assistant. The as -  sistant goes in and the assistant takes credit for it. So if they... Hey, how does this feel  now? Oh my gosh, that feels so much better. All right, you know, I just adjusted that right  there. Just smooth that out a little bit. Oh my goodness, you're a lifesaver. That's fabulous.  Good. Let them take... You know, don't feel like you get ripped off there that you didn't get  09/01/25   Page   of 11   17

SSC 2.0 - 511: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 2  the credit for that. You don't want the credit for that. You want the assistant to get the credit  for that. The assistant watched you do what you did and they learned from it. And they're  like, okay, doc did this, did this technique to smooth it out. Patient was blown away. I'll do  that next time. Okay. That's important.  Same Person Discuss Finances   [0:32:49]  Try to have the same person that will discuss finances in the room with you during the  exam and treatment planning or in front of the patient. Explain to the financial person what  needs to be done and why. This helps to avoid any confusion on financial stuff. So if you  can at least have a handoff from, hey, you know, Marsha, this is Steve and we've been  talking about this and this and this and here's why he's here and here's his journey and  he's going to do oral appliance therapy. And I told him you're going to come in and you're  going to talk about all the insurance stuff and things like that. And he's looking to get start -  ed right now to get his records today so he can get rolling. He's going on a cruise in a  month. We want to get him taken care of before that cruise. Okay. So Marsha, here's all  that. She knows why he was there. She knows the chief complaint. She knows the reason  that he needs to get going quickly, all that kind of stuff. Make sure that you can do that  whenever possible.  [0:33:49]  To go through everything with the patient and then leave and the financial person comes in  and they don't know the details, that's setting you up for potential problems down the road  because they may claim that they... You know, the person who did the financials didn't re -  ally understand the situation or whatever or the doctor said this or that and that's kind of  the point here that's in bold. Be careful, doctor, answering questions about insurance and  money. If you haven't already been told by your front desk folks to never talk about insur -  ance, let me tell you for them. Never talk about insurance. Never talk about money. Well,  you can talk about money and you can tell them your fee. You can do things like that. But  it's almost always a mistake for the doctor to say something like, oh, you have Blue Cross,  that's great. We're in network with Blue Cross. Blue Cross usually covers everything. I'm  sure it's going to be very little for you out of pocket. Then you find out that the patient has a  $5,000 deductible that they've not met a dime of and it's going to be 100% out of pocket.  [0:34:55]  Okay. So probably better for you just to be like, oh... If they bring it up, oh yeah, my insur -  ance is Blue Cross. You know, how much is it going to cost if I have Blue Cross? Hey,  that's an awesome question. Marsha's going to be in with you in a minute. She's a genius  on that stuff. She's going to go over all of it. As a matter of fact, we're in network with Blue  Cross. So I'm sure that she's already figured out, you know, your deductible and all that  kind of stuff. She'll be able to come in and go over all that with you. However, just remem -  ber, it's your life we're talking about here. Marsha's job is to not only talk to you about the  09/01/25   Page   of 12   17

SSC 2.0 - 511: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 2  insurance stuff, but to help you get the care that you need. Okay, let me get Marsha. Hey,  Marsha, come in. Hey, and Joan had a question about her Blue Cross. I know you're about  to go over that with her. If you say stuff, they're going to hold you to it. If you say stuff like,  oh yeah, you know, Dr. Spencer said that this was covered by my insurance, they'll hold  you to that, and you'll probably fold. You probably will. You'll probably be like, oh, I did say  something like that.  [0:35:49]  I was once with one of my business lead members, I was at his office, and he had a pa -  tient that had TRICARE, and he's like, oh, TRICARE, yeah, they cover all this. It's awe -  some, great, blah, blah, blah, blah, goes through all this stuff. Then finds out that for the  reason that the person was there, they actually didn't cover it, and he ended up treating  that patient for free. And his office manager was not happy about it at all, but he felt that it  was more important to be a man of his word, and he had told this person that this is...  You're not going to pay anything out of pocket. That was a mistake. I bet you he's never  made that mistake again.  What About Challenging People   [0:36:30]  Okay. Some more stuff about challenging people. Well, what about at insurance compa -  nies or other offices? So typically your scenario here is that your team is having to interact  with insurance people or a referring office is often the scenario here with sleep and TMD,  and they're having to get records.  Some Tips   [0:36:53]  Okay. So here's some tips here. Patients, and this is for your staff too, to be patient and to  understand that you giving that insurance company or that referring doctor's office is the  big one, a job. Hey, would you please fax us this thing? You've now given them a job to  refer you a patient, and that job does not make them any money. It does not really do any -  thing for them. It just allows you to see the patient. So be patient with your demands of  other people. Don't match mean with mean. So a lot of these... This slide is really for you  to teach your team members. If someone's like, what do you need that for? Nobody else  needs that. And the staff member comes back with like, well, we just do. I mean, come on.  We got to have this. Do you want your patient to get treated here or not? Okay. No, that's  not cool. Raving fans is what we're trying to create here. So we want this referring doctor's  office, the office person that is sending you the sleep study and you're trying to get... We  want them to be raving fans. So rather than pestering them, bothering them, whatever,  thinking long-term, is there anything I can do here to build a relationship with this person?  09/01/25   Page   of 13   17

SSC 2.0 - 511: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 2  Is there anything I can do here that could help them out in some way that they could be a  raving fan?  [0:38:22]  Now, once they are a friend or a raving fan, the person's life is going to be a lot easier. Get  involved, and this is for you, the doctor. And I know team members watch these videos too,  right? You have team member accounts. So this one, team member, you might be like,  hey, I understand what Dr. Spencer's talking about here. I've had some of these situations.  If you've got someone in another office, you're trying to get those records, they never get  them to you. It's a pain in the butt. You've got to go three, four times to ask for it before  they finally, you know, in a huff, kind of like, oh, fine, I'll get them to you. And they get them  to you, and you're like, oh, geez, not their office again. Going to have to deal with Marge  over there at that office. She's always such a jerk. Never gets me anything on time. This is  when the doctor needs to get involved. And in my experience with this, I will go to the doc -  tor, and I will explain why we need those records. And I will explain it to the office person.  [0:39:18]  Now, I try to do that right at the beginning of relationships. When I meet a new potential  referring doctor for the first time, as I'm leaving, I will typically talk to the front desk, and I  will talk to them about this and say, hey, this is a little different. Dr. Smith's going to be re -  ferring patients over to us. I know you're probably not really used to this, but we have to  have all of this stuff. I don't know. Do your patients here that come and see you, do they  like to have their insurance cover stuff? They do? Yeah. You know what? Ours do too for  some reason. So the thing that kind of sucks is insurance won't pay for oral appliance  therapy unless we have a note about the face-to-face with the physician before the sleep  study. We have to have the sleep study. We have to have a note that they tried CPAP and  failed if they have severe sleep apnea. There's like all this stuff that we have to have, and  we can only get it from you. And we're so sorry. I so wish that we could just get this on our  own.  [0:40:18]  Now, there are some cases, by the way, sidebar here, that you can get it on your own. Like  if you could be on Epic and they're on Epic, then you could just go get those records on  your own. And that's amazing when that happens. This is not that scenario. So this is a  scenario where you're having to ask the people for this. And this is not uncommon that the  office will be a little miffed that they're having to do this extra work in their mind that they  never get asked to do when they put people on CPAP. Okay. So meet with the medical di -  rector and insurance company if we've got a spat with an insurance person. Meet with the  doctor if it's a referral source thing. Try to get in their shoes, figure out if there's any solu -  tion that you can come up with. And lastly, have a meet and greet with the team members.  I've only had to do this a couple times in my career. And every time that I did, it was mas -  sively successful.  [0:41:11]  People are more likely to be mean and rude not in person. So they're going to do that over  the phone. They're going to do that via emails. There's no tone in the email. You think  09/01/25   Page   of 14   17

SSC 2.0 - 511: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 2  they're coming off as snotty in the email, but they really aren't. They're just rushed or busy.  When you get people in person and talk about the challenges and explain what needs to  be done and why, they tend to figure it out. I've never had a case where we brought them  together and we bring in lunch. So we're the good guys in this, right? We bring in lunch.  We have the discussion. What can we do for you? How can we make this easier? All that  kind of stuff. And I've never done that without it being real positive afterwards.  Team Members Who Just Won't Get on Board With Sleep   [0:41:59]  And what about if you have team members who just won't get on board with sleep? Okay.  now if you are a team member watching this right now, this might make you slightly un -  comfortable. But here's kind of the steps if a team member is not getting it. They just don't  care about this sleep apnea stuff. So try to figure out why. Provide proper education on  why this is so important. Relate it to other things that they already do like cancer screen -  ings, insurance billing, talking to patients about other dental issues, things like that. Treat  them, the team member that is, their family members. They're probably sleep deprived.  They're not at their best. Make them a raving fan of treatment. And then lastly, consider  helping them find a career path elsewhere if none of the rest of the stuff works. In other  words, let them go.  Sad & Scary Story   [0:42:56]  Now let me tell you kind of a sad, scary story on this. So one of our Spencer Study Club  members had incorporated dental sleep medicine into his restorative practice for years  and built it up to a sizable practice. He was doing about a million dollars a year in sleep,  little tiny bit of TMD, and about a million dollars in restorative dentistry. And his dream was  to sell the general dental practice and only do sleep and TMD. And he talked about this for  years and kept growing. The dental sleep medicine part of his practice had become a big -  ger and bigger part of their overall practice. And then he told basically his team, hey, this is  real now. We're going to make this move in the next year or so here. We're going to find a  buyer for the practice. We're going to sell the practice and I'm going to do sleep and TMD  only and as part of that, they decided, let's take our team, all of them, hygienists, front  desk, assistants out to Boise and shadow Dr. Spencer's office.  [0:44:17]  And they knew that we had a big operation and they wanted their team to see the vision  of, hey, this is what this could be. You know, these guys are running probably at that point  when they shouted us a $3.5 million practice or something, right? And they're like, I'm go -  ing to go show them this. They're going to be super excited out of their mind. This is going  to be great. Okay. They go take their team there and basically even before they'd gone  09/01/25   Page   of 15   17

SSC 2.0 - 511: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 2  back home, they had two or three team members submit their two week notification, sub -  mit their two weeks, quit, resign. They were blown away. They're like, you got to be kidding  me. Well, here's what had happened. All the talk, all the stuff that had happened for years  prior wasn't real until they went to our office in Boise. And then these hygienists, dental as -  sistants saw this in action. They saw that there was no hygienists in our Boise practice.  [0:45:25]  The dental assistants talked to our dental assistants and realized that they weren't ever  dental assistants. Our dental assistants didn't go to dental assisting school. They'd never  passed instruments and stuff like that. And so the dental assistants and the hygienists  were like, well, there's nothing for us in a dental sleep medicine TMD practice. Now I think  they were wrong because this doctor had had these people work for him for a long time  and he would have accommodated that and they would have been happy. They probably  would have been more happy actually. But in their mind, it was like, okay, I need to jump  ship. And it was really crazy because he was bringing in another doctor. So they were go -  ing to work for another doctor anyway, if they quit, he was bringing in a doctor, they could  have stayed in the same location, stayed with the same patients, stayed with everything.  But somehow they created the story in their mind that they had to quit. So that really left  them in a lurch. They had to replace these employees and stuff and it was a real bummer  for them.  Keep Your Team in the Loop   [0:46:29]  So if you're the doctor watching this, be careful with that and make sure that you are keep -  ing your team in the loop as this goes. And if you have hygienists and dental assistants  and they're really connected to that identity of being a dental hygienist, and this is your vi -  sion that you're going to one day have a sleep and TMD practice only, talk to them about  that upfront. And again, they may be thrilled. They're like, yeah, man, my neck is hurting  me. Jeez, to transition into something that I didn't have to do that, that'd be amazing.  Clearly, we're going to have to figure out the payment and stuff, Doc, because I know as a  hygienist, I'm the one that's really doing a lot of the production here, and that might be dif -  ferent in a dental sleep TMD practice. But on the other hand, if my neck didn't hurt all the  time, that would be worth a lot to me, so let's figure something out. Versus, well, actually,  yeah, I'm a hygienist. This is what I like to do. This is all I'm going to do, so I'll stick with the  person you sell the practice to. That would be logical, right? If... and I've seen this in prac -  tices before, if they just don't care, they just can't get around their mind around dental  sleep medicine TMD and helping people in this way, probably not a good fit for you. Okay?  So let them go.  Challenging Cases   [0:47:47]  09/01/25   Page   of 16   17

SSC 2.0 - 511: Challenging Oral Appliance Therapy Cases Part 2  All right, that is some challenging cases, some challenging people, some challenging of  employee stuff. I hope that is helpful for you and that you will refer to this, but really re -  member, it's about preventing is... an ounce of prevention, right? All of these things, if you  can kind of prevent these, then you're going to have a much easier life, and you really can.  You're still going to make mistakes. You're going to be like, ah, gosh darn it, if I would have  said this there, that wouldn't have happened. If I would have done this, if I would have ed -  ucated them a little bit better, that's okay. That's what practice is, and that's what practice  is going to give you. It's going to help you learn these things over time, but you can always  come back here and on the challenging unicorn cases that are just like, whoa, Jamison  doesn't talk about this anywhere in Spencer Study Club, this is where you go to the Face -  book group, share this with others.  [0:48:40]  That's one of the biggest powers of Spencer Study Club is you are harnessing thousands  of dentist knowledge, and we may not have thousands of members at any given time, but  over a period of years, we have had well over 1,000 dentists in Spencer Study Club, thou -  sands of dentists in Spencer Study Club, and that's all kept there, right? That Facebook  group goes back for all those years. You can search for different things that have been  brought up over the years and see if like, oh, yeah, that's exactly what I got going on here.  It's already been answered. It's already been asked and answered right there seven years  ago. But if it hasn't, then almost for sure there's going to be someone in the group that has  experienced what you're going through. I've seen this over and over again with cancers,  with weird things that show up on x-rays. I don't think there's ever been a time where  everyone has been like, never seen that before. There's been plenty of times where I've  like, I've never seen that before, but there will be someone in the group be like, hey, you  know what? Yeah, I did have a case like that. That's the power of all of us being together.  Okay. hope you enjoyed that session. Take care.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 17   17

