SSC 2.0 - 216: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 1  SSC 2.0   Level 2  216: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 1  [intro music]  Understanding Sleep Studies   [0:00:12]  Hey everybody, Jamison Spencer here. Welcome to Understanding Sleep Studies. A little  different look for you today in my office studio here. We're going to be working on my com -  puter going through this, so wanted to do this from my desk. It's a little bit different look for  you. Hope you enjoy this. So we're going to go over understanding sleep studies as the  name, as the title would imply there, and why this is important is very often a few things  here. Very often you will be the first one to actually go over the sleep study with the pa -  tient. And I know that may seem crazy, but that's actually, in my experience, gotten worse  over time, not better, and I'll kind of discuss some of this evolution from polysomnogram to  home sleep testing and stuff like that. But we've moved into where people rarely see the  sleep doctor. They sometimes will see a nurse practitioner or PA, which is great, and if  they do get that, they'll often go over the sleep study in pretty good detail, as a matter of  fact. But more often than not, the way sleep typically works, and I'm sure I've covered this  or will cover this in other sections, but it bears repeating.  [0:01:48]  We do it as dentists, currently anyway, different than our medical colleagues. So let's say  that you or I went to our medical doctor for just kind of a normal checkup or something,  and they decided that a sleep study might be indicated based on whatever symptomatol -  ogy you're having, and they ask you questions about how are you sleeping and stuff like  that, and you come back with like, "Yeah, you know, not great." And so they decide that a  sleep study is indicated. Well, a couple things could happen. That primary care doctor  might have their own home sleep testing units. This would be relatively uncommon, but  happens. And they could give you that home sleep testing unit and then have you take it  home, have you use it for a night or two or three, and then bring it back. They would then  download that information. They would have it read by a board certified sleep doctor, and  then they'd get a report. And they may then, depending on that doctor, go over that report  with you in detail, or they may just say you do or don't have sleep apnea and go to the  next step.  [0:03:16]  So that's one way it could happen. Another way that would be more common would be the  primary care doctor would refer for a home sleep test, and that could possibly be taken  care of by a company that does that sort of thing. There are many different companies that  will mail home sleep testing equipment to a person's home, and they just get it in the mail,  09/01/25   Page   of 1   11

SSC 2.0 - 216: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 1  and it has instructions on how to set it up and everything. And then same thing, after  they've used it for a night or two or three, they send it back, and it's read by a board certi -  fied sleep doctor. And then a report would be sent to the primary care doctor. That would  be quite common. Another option would be the primary care doctor works with a local  sleep lab. Maybe they're part of a hospital system, and that hospital system has a sleep  lab. Well, how that would work is the physician would refer to the sleep lab, to the sleep  doctor's office, and very often the sleep doctor would not need to see that patient in ad -  vance of the home sleep test being administered. So the local sleep lab, hospital sleep  lab, would set up something with the patient where they would come and get the home  sleep testing equipment, or maybe they would mail it to them.  [0:04:56]  The patient would use it for a night or two or three. It would be read by that board certified  sleep doctor that's part of that system, and then a report would go back to the primary care  doctor. So those are more or less the ways that this is going to be done nowadays, and  part of this is driven by insurance companies. A lot of insurance companies won't pay for a  full PSG without a home sleep test first, and the person has to fail a home sleep test,  which we'll talk about that. Now, the way we do it as dentists is we tend to refer to the  sleep doctor, and even if you have been using home sleep testing and say using some  company to do that for you because you took some course and they're like, "Yeah, this is  the easiest way to do it," and indeed it may be the easiest way, I'm not sure it's the best  way. But even then, you're doing it differently. So let's say you're using a company current -  ly, you do your screening, you would then connect the patient with the company, and actu -  ally what would happen in most states anyway, is that the patient would have a telemedi -  cine visit with a doctor or a nurse practitioner or a PA or something like that.  [0:06:29]  Whatever is going to be required by insurance, this is the reason these things are done  this way. There has to be a face-to-face with a physician prior to the sleep study. And as I  mentioned before, that is handled because the primary care doctor is driving the bus in  this. The primary care doctor is the one who's decided, "Hey, Jamison, we need to get a  sleep study." So that is the face-to-face right there. With us, we're not medical doctors. So  a medical doctor, and again, this could vary by state, it may not have to be an MD or DO, it  could be a PA or an NP. But let's just for sake of argument here, let's say it's a medical  doctor is required. There's going to be a telemedicine visit typically where the doctor has a  short visit with the patient via telemedicine, asks them some stuff, says, "Yep, sounds like  you need a sleep study," boom, those notes would then be part of the record of why this  person got the sleep study. That would be that face-to-face. Then the HSD would be  shipped and done and read by the board-certified sleep doctor.  [0:07:44]  Notice I say board-certified sleep doctor every time. Why is that? Because currently insur -  ance companies in the United States require sleep studies to be read by a board-certified  sleep doctor, a sleep doctor that is credentialed, that is boarded in sleep medicine. And as  we've talked about in other sections, doctors come into sleep medicine in various ways. So  09/01/25   Page   of 2   11

SSC 2.0 - 216: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 1  their background might be in pulmonology or neurology or ENT or family medicine or psy -  chiatry or stuff like that. So that's important for you to understand because when you work  locally, now if you are doing the model where you work with a company that is mailing  HSDs and stuff, then that's actually a different story. But let's say you would like to have a  more local model, which is what we do in our practices in Boise and in Salt Lake. We work  with local sleep doctors. For almost everything that we do is with local sleep doctors. And  let's say you're like, "Yeah, that sounds cool, I'd like to do that." Well, initially, there may be  some learning that has to occur there. There may be some teaching that has to occur with  that sleep doctor's office.  [0:09:08]  And I've seen this over and over again. They will treat you like you are a physician, like  you are a primary care doctor. And you say, "Hey, Jamison, let's get you over to the sleep  lab for a sleep study." And so I call up the sleep lab, "Hey, my dentist referred me to you  for a sleep study," and they may say, "Okay, great, let's get you in." And that's cool until  they want to get paid because they will need the face-to-face with the physician prior to the  sleep study in order to get the sleep study paid. Home sleep test or polysomnogram  doesn't matter. They're going to need that. And guess what? We don't count. So the note  from us saying this person has excessive daytime somnolence, let's say we used an up -  ward sleepiness scale, we did a pretty good job, let's say, of our evaluation, doesn't count,  right? We just, it's not in our scope as far as that insurance company is concerned. So  that's going to be a bummer. So what you're going to need to do if you're going to try to do  this locally is you need to talk to that sleep doctor, to that sleep lab, to the manager of the  sleep lab sometimes.  [0:10:23]  They might be the one that understands this insurance stuff better. Most medical doctors  really aren't involved in the billing and whatnot. They may not know what needs to be  done. And let them know. Say, "Hey, this is different. I appreciate that you guys treat me as  a colleague. However, the way we have to do things here in order to get you guys paid  and ultimately the patient covered for treatment down the road is we need to have a face-  to-face with a physician prior to the sleep study." So what we do in our practices, and you  are welcome to follow this model, is we refer to sleep doctors for a consultation, for an  evaluation. Well, let me use the word consultation. That's maybe better because some -  times evaluation we think sleep study, right? So what I'm talking about is the sales pitch to  the patient, and you should have heard this earlier in Level 2 here, is, "Would you be open  to having a conversation, a consultation with Dr. Rasmus, our sleep doctor?" And that's it.  That's the whole sales pitch. The whole sales pitch is, "Would you be open to having a  conversation with the sleep doctor?"  [0:11:47]  Not, "I'm sending you for a sleep test. I'm not sending you for a sleep study. I'm not send -  ing you for a polysomnogram. I'm just sending you to talk to the sleep doctor. You and the  sleep doctor will decide what the next steps are." So that's how we do it. And I find that  that is easier. It's amazing to me how often colleagues will talk about struggles they have  09/01/25   Page   of 3   11

SSC 2.0 - 216: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 1  with their patients going to see the doctor or they do the whole home sleep test thing on  their own. And then they're surprised when the patient doesn't go into treatment. And it  doesn't surprise me at all because it's the way we do it in our practice and the way I rec -  ommend that you do it, if possible. This isn't possible for everybody, but if it's possible,  what we refer to as framing and pre-framing is so much stronger when you, as their den -  tist, do your evaluation, say, "I don't like what I'm seeing here. I think that your TMJ prob -  lem might be related to an airway issue. Maybe you're trying to keep from suffocating to  death at night. That's why you're clenching your teeth.  [0:13:01]  Maybe that's why you're breaking your crowns off. Maybe that's why you're doing this.  Maybe that's why your front teeth are worn down. I'm going to help you with that. We're  going to get those restored, but it would be terrible if we ignored the actual underlying  cause of your problem and just did the superficial repair without understanding what's go -  ing on underneath." An analogy I like to use here is if we saw big cracks in our walls at our  house, you could just plaster it in and paint over it, but you'd be pretty much guaranteed  that that stuff's going to come back and maybe worse because it's indicating that there's  something else going on. That's what we're seeing in your mouth. It's actually indications  of something else. Now, I don't know if it's a sleep issue, if it's an apnea issue. Therefore,  would you be open to having a conversation with the sleep doctor? I don't know if you  need a sleep test or any of that kind of stuff, but would you be open to having a conversa -  tion? Again, the vast majority of patients are going to say, "Yeah, I'm open to that. Yeah,  that kind of makes sense."  [0:14:15]  And you're like, "Oh, by the way, all of that will be covered by your medical insurance."  Okay, cool. So you refer over, then the sleep doctor has that initial consultation with the  patient, and they're going to ask the questions, and they're going to go into more detail,  and it's not going to be weird, right? So it's a little bit weird, currently anyway. I hope that in  the near future, this isn't weird anymore. But currently, patients have not been prepared for  their dentist to ask them questions about sleep and stopping breathing when they sleep  and sleep in general, right? That's not been something as dentists that we have focused  on in the past. So it's going to take some time before patients are like, "Oh, yeah, it's  common. This is something my dentist does." But a sleep doctor, they're a sleep doctor.  You know, it's in their name, right? So that's not going to be weird at all. So the patient's  going to go, they're going to have that conversation with the sleep doctor. The sleep doctor  is going to decide, "Yeah, let's get a sleep study."  [0:15:19]  By the way, sleep doctors almost always get sleep studies. How come? Because they  know from lots of experience that they can't just look at somebody and tell if they have  sleep apnea or not. They can look at some people and tell if they have sleep apnea. But  they can't look at everybody to know if they have sleep apnea. And your patients are going  to skew younger and thinner, and more female. So therefore, you're going to have your  patients talk with the sleep doctor. The sleep doctor's going to be like, "Yeah, not sure." Or,  09/01/25   Page   of 4   11

SSC 2.0 - 216: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 1  "Hey, let's get a study. Let's find out." They get a study. They come back, go over it with the  sleep doctor to some level. And there you go. And if they have sleep apnea, and let's say  that they have mild to moderate sleep apnea, the sleep doctors that we work with tend to  at least give people the choice of oral appliance therapy. They are very open to oral appli -  ance therapy. They've had hundreds if not thousands of patients have success with oral  appliance therapy. That takes time to build too. Just the other day, I had a member of  Spencer Study Club reach out. And he said, "Yeah, I have this sleep doctor in my commu -  nity.  [0:16:33]  And she appears to be telling people that they should really do CPAP because oral appli -  ances may not work for them." And he was kind of upset about this. And he was asking me  what he should do. And I gave him some advice on sharing ASM guidelines with the doctor  and stuff like that and how he could manage that conversation. But then I said, "Are you in  network with medical insurance?" And he said, "No." And I said, well, that's why they're  having that conversation then. Because to them, the patient has to pay out of pocket for  your treatment. And that's several thousand dollars. Whereas for CPAP, they pay basically  nothing. It's rented that first three months. It's basically nothing. And nothing up front.  They'll get the CPAP machine without paying anything at all. And so, you know, put your -  self in the doctor's shoes there. Would you offer a patient a treatment that you know is go -  ing to work if they can stand it, and you know it's going to cost them very little? Yeah, why  not? So I told him, I'm like, "If I were you, lean into it. Tell them, like, hey, you know, put  everybody on CPAP.  [0:17:54]  I don't care if they have an AHI..." You can give them an option, of course, but if they have  even mild sleep apnea, why not? And that way they got that treatment and it's covered by  their insurance, and if they do great, awesome. And if they don't, all right, well, I'm there for  them, and they've already attempted this other treatment, and so they know that they're  not going to tolerate CPAP. That's going to make them a stronger candidate for oral appli -  ance therapy. So that's a big, big lead-in to understanding sleep studies, but this is really  important because you need to understand how we are working in this field and our role in  this field currently, and how we will interact with patients and how this works, and if you're  in the United States, how it works with insurance and all that kind of stuff. All right, so there  is our prologue.  Types of Studies   [0:18:52]  Okay, so let's talk about different types of studies. We have our polysomnogram, or so-  called type 1 study, also called an attended study. Now, when I first got started in the field,  this is what a sleep study was. So everybody got a PSG. Everybody went to the sleep  lab.   And frankly, that was great. We got more information. We got more data. It's more  09/01/25   Page   of 5   11

SSC 2.0 - 216: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 1  sensitive. We're able to pick things up that you can't otherwise, and pretty cool. And then,  as I'll talk about a little bit later, there was a shift to home sleep testing. So home sleep  testing, also called ambulatory testing, also called out-of-center testing. Typically, nowa -  days, just called home sleep testing. And so over here, we have the picture of the dude  with a whole bunch of stuff on him. We'll go over that in a minute of all those different  leads. And then here we have the Metabyte, which is just one example of a home sleep  testing unit that has several leads. It just doesn't have as many leads as a full in-lab study.  Type 1   [0:20:00]  All right, so our different types of studies, we have type 1, 2, 3, and 4, and this is according  to Medicare. So type 1, excuse my reading a lot of these slides here, but that's the most  efficient here for explaining this. So type 1 is, again, our attended study. This is oversight  of a sleep technologist. So we have to have a certified polysomnogram tech there. The  polysomnogram tech can be over one person, two persons, or even three people with that,  and that will still be covered by insurance. So that's pretty hard. A lot of labs, because  they're trying to be efficient financially, will have that sleep tech be over three people. A lot  of sleep doctors I work with, they don't like that. They just don't think it's good quality. So  they will limit it to two people, but not uncommon at all. I would say more often than not, it's  the tech is over two people, and then every once in a while you'll see a tech being over  three people. So this must include EEG, EOG, ECG, or also called EKG, chin EMG, limb  EMG, respiratory effort at thorax and abdomen, airflow from nasal cannula and or thermis -  tor, and pulse oximetry. So that is all the requirements to be a full PSG, an attended study.  Type 2   [0:21:35]  Type two is an unattended study, home study, must have a minimum of seven channels.  These include EEG, brain waves, EOG, eye movement, I didn't say that in the last one, so  let me kind of go over these. EKG, heart rate, EMG, muscle, airflow through either a ther -  mistor or a cannula, respiratory effort, these are the belts you'll see on, like in that one pic -  ture I just showed, it was a belt up here and then one down on the stomach, airflow, respi -  ratory effort, oxygen saturation through a pulse oximeter. Basically a comprehensive sleep  study, but without the technologist presence. So type 2 are quite rare. It's very uncommon  to see a type 2 study because you got all the different leads. Where they did do these for a  while was in total hassle, the patient would go to the sleep tech, get all the stuff set up. So  in a minute I'm going to show a video of my son Jared getting set up for a sleep study, and  it's involved. So putting on the EEG leads and stuff like that, it's not just slapping a thing on  your head. So pretty involved, and they would get all set up, then they would go home and  sleep, and then come back, and then get all unhooked and stuff like that. Or they maybe  09/01/25   Page   of 6   11

SSC 2.0 - 216: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 1  unhooked at home, but then they would bring back the device. Very uncommon to do this.  That's a type 2.  Type 3   [0:23:00]  Type 3, unattended study, another home study, must have a minimum of four channels,  including EKG or heart rate, oxygen saturation, And you could get the heart rate and stuff  from a pulse oximeter too. Oxygen saturation from that same pulse oximeter. Two chan -  nels for respiratory movement/airflow, so it could have a cannula. Most type 3 monitors do  not record the signals needed to determine sleep stages or sleep disruption. So most type  three don't have any brainwaves, so we don't actually know if the person's asleep. So  these are kind of, we refer to all of these things as home sleep tests. I've heard some  sleep doctors refer to them as ambulatory breathing studies, meaning we're letting you  take this home and we are measuring your airflow, and we assume you're asleep, right?  So there are some exceptions to this, like your ones that use PAT technology, Peripheral  Arterial Tone, like WatchPAT that can actually tell if someone's asleep or not. But a lot of  the home sleep testing devices don't actually know if the patient's asleep, which we'll come  back to that more.  Type 4   [0:24:19]  And then type 4, this is another unintended study, home study, must have a minimum of  three channels and must measure airflow, thoracoabdominal movement to calculate AHI  and O2 SATs. So that will be something with just a belt, maybe airflow thing, maybe pulse  ox, that's a type 4.  Polysomnogram   [0:24:40]  Polysomnogram is typically 12 channels or more, varies from lab to lab. We have three  electroencephalogram channels taking information from eight electrodes to pick up the  brainwaves, and these are put in very specific spots on the head in order to get those  brainwaves. One to two channels to measure airflow, either through a nasal or oronasal  cannula, pressure transducer, and or a thermocouple. Sometimes these are one unit, so  you'll see like on the little picture here up in the corner, the dude's got this thing taped in  there, and sometimes that'll be in the nose, very often in a sleep lab it's going to be in the  nose with a little thing that comes down over the mouth, so it can tell mouth breathing too,  not just nasal breathing. And the thermocouple means that it will have a little sensor in this  device to pick up the temperature difference of the warmed air.  09/01/25   Page   of 7   11

SSC 2.0 - 216: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 1  Electromyography (EMG)   [0:25:42]  So it's not just airflow, but it's picking it up on a couple different ways. Okay, one to two  leads to measure muscle tone, this is EMG. So we see up here on this picture again, he's  got under the chin, and this is normally where these are done. So on a in-lab sleep study, if  there is indication of bruxism or if they talk about bruxism, it's from that almost always.  Now this depends as you start working with a sleep lab locally, and if you're blessed like I  am that so in Idaho we still mostly do PSGs, they mostly do in-lab studies, and it's awe -  some. So when there are patients, they will often instead of doing the chin leads, they will  put them on the masseters, and that just gives a little bit better data. Now if the EMG lead  is down on the mentalis or submental muscles there, if you clench your teeth, you're still  going to have electrical activity that will be picked up there. So you will still see indications  of bruxism even with chin leads, but you'll see it a lot easier or more, I guess, if it's on the  masseter.  [0:27:02]  Speaking of that, it is extremely uncommon for you to have on a sleep study a mention of  bruxism. And that may be like shocking, you're like, "What? Tons of people grind their  teeth." Yeah, they do. The reason in my opinion that that is not mentioned more is because  medical doctors couldn't care less if the patient's a bruxing or not. So the little phrase is, if  there's no solution, there's no problem. A medical doctor doesn't necessarily have a solu -  tion for the bruxism, that would be a dentist thing. Most medical doctors don't necessarily  readily refer, ENTs do and to refer to dentists all the time. But primary care doctors may or  may not, they may say, "See your dentist," that's it. So in my experience, it's actually rela -  tively uncommon for the sleep test to say that the patient clenched or grind their teeth, or  that bruxism was evident. However, once you start working with a sleep lab, then surprise,  surprise, you're going to start seeing it all the time. And again, my theory on that is you're a  dentist. So if they see that this patient started their journey to the sleep lab because of  you, a dentist, and yeah, they had a conversation, a consultation with the sleep doctor, the  sleep doctor ordered the sleep test.  [0:28:30]  So, as far as the sleep tech is concerned, this test was ordered by the sleep doctor. Never -  theless, the sleep tech would have those notes that it's from a dentist. So there, the sleep  tech very often will put into their notes as as they go through the report from the sleep  study, they will put the bruxism stuff. But you won't typically see that mentioned in my ex -  perience. It will depend from lab to lab. But again, don't be surprised if after a while you  start doing a lot of these and they start mentioning it all the time because they know, "Hey,  well, this is a dentist, they're probably going to be interested in that." So that's the muscle  tone stuff.  [0:29:10]  09/01/25   Page   of 8   11

SSC 2.0 - 216: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 1  One to two for leg movement as well as muscle tone, typically of the anterior tibialis of  each leg. The muscle tone thing too, in case this isn't crystal clear to you, is for REM  sleep, right? So in REM sleep we have a loss of muscle tone and that's an indicator of  REM sleep. But then also we have these leads for bruxism and for periodic limb move -  ments. That's the idea there.  EOG, ECG/EKG, SpO2 & HR   [0:29:36]  Continuing on, electrooculogram, the EOG, that's to pick up eye movement. So these are,  if you see on this picture here, these are the ones that are up by the guy's eyes and that  will pick up the eye muscle movements for REM sleep. One to two for electrocardiogram,  ECG or EKG to measure heart rate and rhythm. One for oxygen saturation, pulse oximetry,  grain oxygen saturation and heart rate. One each for effort belts measuring chest wall  movement and upper abdominal movement. In this picture we just see the chest belt, but  in the previous picture with the MediByte actually we saw one around the stomach too.  And snoring. So snoring may be measured with a microphone placed on the neck or it can  also be noted by the technologist. Well, how can it be noted by the technologist? Well, be -  cause also there's a camera with a microphone in the room and also a speaker for that  matter so that the technologist can speak to the patient. And when they're getting them set  up and stuff, they have them get in bed in there and they say, "Okay, blink your eyes, you  know, look to the right, look to the left, move your legs, you know, breathe in deeply."  [0:30:53]  They set all of the leads and making sure that all those leads are working. With that, they  have the camera there. Usually these are filmed. You've seen films. I've shown you videos  of sleep studies and stuff in kids and adults. And there's a microphone. So the microphone  will pick up the snoring as well. Most sleep labs that I've ever been involved with will have  a lead for snoring and it will be prominently, you know, we'll see this as we go over the  sleep studies that you will see that indication of the snoring.  [0:31:42]  So here we're going to watch a video of my son Jared getting set up for his sleep study.  I'm pretty confident he would not be thrilled with me showing this video, but that's tough.  So see if you can, I've got all of the different leads here on the one side of the slide and I'll  just let the video play and see if you can tell which leads are being put on through this  video.  [video playback] [0:32:03 - 0:35:24]  [0:35:24]  Alright, that was a lot of stuff, wasn't it? So then it's like, "Alright, good night, have a good  night's sleep." So how many of you think that you would have a good night's sleep with all  09/01/25   Page   of 9   11

SSC 2.0 - 216: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 1  that stuff put on you? The last picture here of those three sleep techs, delightful people  and love their job, they work at night. They work the night shift. So these people will tend  to have health conditions themselves, ironically. Since they are shift workers, that is a  sleep disorder in and of itself. Nevertheless, that's a lot of stuff, huh? So I've had a full  PSG before. As a matter of fact, I think I've had two, if I remember correctly. And it's a lot of  stuff. I slept pretty much fine. But here's one of the big arguments of supporting home  sleep testing is in a PSG, that's super weird. I got the thousand wires. I'm like, hey, you  saw there too that he started off anyway on his back. And historically, they've told people  to stay on their back because they wanted to see them at their worst. That has changed a  little bit. They don't necessarily tell people, "Just sleep on your back."  [0:36:47]  You remember my dad's story of him thinking the sleep study was a bunch of baloney be -  cause they made me sleep on my back and I don't sleep on my back, he said, which is  true. So they don't do that as much anymore. Nevertheless, if you just got all that stuff on  you, you're not thinking, "Well, I should probably just roll all over the place here," because  you got a bajillion wires on you. Just the pulse oximeter alone on your finger is kind of  weird and having that pressure there. So there is a valid argument to be made that the  less invasive this, I mean it's not invasive, but the less annoying this test is, the better. And  if it could be done in your own bed and not in, you know, a strange bed and not with  someone watching you from the other room and with the camera and all the stuff that goes  along with this, maybe that would give a more accurate result, that's a valid argument. But  on the other hand, as you're going through that and you look at the home sleep test device  that you're currently using, whether you're doing it yourself or you're using some company  or whatever, it's a lot less information, isn't it? That you're using. So there's the... The rea -  son to do a PSG is you get so much more data, right?  Home “Sleep” Studies   [0:38:12]  Okay. All right, so home sleep tests are usually type 3 studies. These are not usually mea -  suring brain waves. There's variability from device to device on what is measured and  how. Now this is going to be important as we are talking about oral appliance therapy be -  cause I want you to make sure that when you are evaluating folks that you are comparing  apples to apples. And if you had an initial home sleep test and then you follow up with a  different type of home sleep test, that is not apples to apples, lots of these different de -  vices on the market. Not really anything super duper new technology wise. However, they  have gotten smaller and smaller. The NightOwl, which is not pictured here, is just a little  tiny thing that just goes on your fingertip and that's it. So they have become easier to use,  less invasive, very simple and they're able to get this data with less leads, things like that.  09/01/25   Page   of 10   11

SSC 2.0 - 216: Understanding Sleep Studies Part 1  Remember!   [0:39:28]  Now remember, you can not rule out sleep apnea with a home sleep study. You can only  rule it in. This is incredibly important because you will have patients, especially if you are  more of a beginner in this journey, then you start screening your patients and stuff like that  and they'll say, "Oh, I had a sleep study, I don't have sleep apnea." You'd be like, "Okay,  tell me more. What do you mean about that?" "Well, yeah, my doctor ordered a study. I  had this thing come in the mail. It had like a strap on my chest. There's a thing in my nose.  I think there was a thing on my finger. And anyway, yeah, they said I don't have sleep ap -  nea." And what they actually said, so what you do in that circumstance, you go, "Okay,  yeah, that's really interesting. Would you mind if I contact your doctor and just got that  sleep study so I could look it over?" "Yeah, sure, whatever." You call the primary care doc -  tor, "Hey, common patient, I'm grinding their teeth like crazy. I'm wondering if it could be  related to a sleep issue. She said that she had a sleep study with you. Could you do me a  huge favor and just shoot me over that report?" "Sure."  [0:40:33]  They send you the report. The report will typically not say, "This person does not have  sleep apnea." It will say anything from sleep apnea is not noted, that there's no indication  of sleep apnea. It could say something like that. But usually it will say something more like,  "This test is inconclusive for obstructive sleep apnea." And if the patient's symptomatology  suggests otherwise, a polysomnogram is indicated. So that's what I said earlier about fail -  ing a home sleep test. That's what failing a home sleep test means. So your patient who's  like, "Yeah, they said I don't have sleep apnea." That means they failed the home sleep  test, meaning it didn't show anything. So they had a home sleep test. It was inconclusive.  So now we need to go and get the full PSG because this person is still tired all the time.  Does that make sense? So make sure you understand that, that a home sleep test, we're  not ruling it out. Now, the exception to that is the patient's already had a home sleep test.  The same equipment is used on their follow-up sleep study with an oral appliance, let's  say, or because of weight loss or something like that. And now they don't have sleep ap -  nea based on that exact same technology. Now we can rule it out. So there should be a  little asterisk here on there. You cannot rule it out with a home sleep study unless you're  comparing it to another home sleep study. So that is the caveat here. If we're using home  sleep testing, we're doing multiple sleep tests over a period of time or whatever, we're  comparing the results from one to another, all right, then our data set is getting better. My  point with this is you will have patients that will say, "Oh, I had a sleep study, I don't have  sleep apnea." How do you know that? And they just had the one, so that is the key. The  sleep doctor who read that sleep study will typically not say this person doesn't have sleep  apnea. They'll say, "This is not conclusive for sleep apnea, more study needs to be done."  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 11   11

