SSC 2.0 - 401: Marketing that Works Part 1  SSC 2.0   Level 4  401: Marketing that Works Part 1  [intro music]  Marketing That Works   [0:00:12]  Hello and welcome to Marketing That Works. In this session, we're going to talk about  marketing, obviously, both internal and external, and the things that you need to do in or -  der to attract more patients to you. Once you've kind of worked through the patients that  you have in your own practice or as you want to kind of do more in your community, you  are going to have a desire to help more and more people, and this is what we're going to  talk about doing a good job at getting the right people into your practice for you to help.  Now, this guy's pretty smart. He's right. No one can steal your marketing plan if you don't  have a marketing plan.  Everything is Marketing   [0:00:53]  The vast majority of dentists in dental sleep and TMD don't have any type of marketing  plan, and we want to fix that because really everything is marketing. Everything that your  practice does is marketing, and we're going to go through some of those things because  they may be things that you don't think of as marketing. When you talk about marketing to  most dentists, they think of advertising, and advertising and marketing are different in my  opinion. You can use advertising for your marketing, but marketing is really everything that  you're doing from how your phone is answered, the person at your front desk and their  ability to communicate with patients, the reputation that you have in your community, your  reaching out to medical doctors and other dentists for that matter in your community. All of  that is marketing. We'll talk about your letters. We'll talk about all these things that you're  doing within your practice, and we'll also talk about external advertising, external market -  ing that you might use.  Build Your Foundation First   [0:02:01]  I love this quote. You can't build a great building on a weak foundation. You must have a  solid foundation if you're going to have a strong superstructure. So before you start think -  ing about any external marketing, I want you thinking about your foundation. You need to  09/01/25   Page   of 1   20

SSC 2.0 - 401: Marketing that Works Part 1  build your foundation first. If you, and there's lots of companies out here that will steer you  a different direction because guess what? They charge for you doing marketing, and they  will say, yeah, we're going to send you a bunch of patients and stuff like that. I remember  actually a company we worked with for a while. They called themselves Patient Rainmak -  er.  [0:02:37]  That company might still exist. I'm not sure, but dang, they were good actually. They did  what their name said. They made it rain patients. The problem was they were not patients  that we wanted to treat. They were patients that were all concerned. The vast majority of  these patients, it was just all about, does my insurance cover 100% of that or not? And  what ended up happening is it just created a ton of work for our team members, for our  front desk in particular, and our insurance people with tire kickers. And I don't mean that to  be offensive to these people that were responding to this marketing, but that's what they  were. They weren't really serious about getting help for themselves. They just wanted  something kind of for nothing. And so we shut that down pretty quick because it was not  our target audience of people who actually care about their health.  Marketing Pyramid   [0:03:34]  This is something I share with our business elite people, and I want to go over this be -  cause this is critically important when we are talking about marketing and or advertising.  So the marketing for a sleep and TMD practice, and this is if you have a restorative prac -  tice and you're looking to build sleep and TMD in your practice, this is the same thing. So a  practice like ours, a practice that is only doing a little bit right now but has an aspiration to  do more, or if you are already doing quite a bit and you're looking to limit your practice one  day to sleep and TMD, this is the model that you need to follow.  Doctor Referrals   [0:04:19]  The base of the pyramid is doctor referrals. That is by far the most important way for you  to get new patients. Now there are a bunch of principles behind that, and I won't go into  detail on all of these things here, but the main reason that is, is because of something  called pre-framing, or just another way to put that, it's trust. A patient will typically trust their  medical doctor or the person who's going to refer them to you or the dentist, doctor, what -  ever. They're going to trust them, and if the patient is coming to you by referral, there is an  extension of that trust. The patient trusts their doctor, the doctor clearly trusts you, or that  doctor wouldn't refer to you, so therefore the patient can trust you. And this is by far, and I'll  get to this in a second, but this is by far the most economical as well because the doctors  09/01/25   Page   of 2   20

SSC 2.0 - 401: Marketing that Works Part 1  who refer to you, be they physicians, dentists, whatever, they're not asking for money  every time you do that, right?  [0:05:30]  So like the advertising company or you put something on Facebook, and they're going to  charge you every time someone looks at your ad. They're not waiting until somebody  comes in and goes into treatment and being like, okay, now you need to pay us. They're  getting paid all the time, and it's up to you to decide if that's worth it or not. Doctors that are  referring to you, just like you, when you refer to a dental specialist, let's say, you're doing  that because it's the right thing for the patient, you want that patient to be cared for, you  want that patient to be cared for the best that they can, and therefore you're sending them  to the best person that you know for that thing. This is how it works. Doctor referrals are  the base of your pyramid. Now, as I've talked about in other levels here or in other ses -  sions of level four, this doesn't mean that if you are practicing in Salt Lake or Boise and  we've already built those relationships with the sleep medicine community, it doesn't mean  that there's nothing you can do. It means that there's other doctors that you're going to get  referrals from.  [0:06:37]  For every sleep doctor in a given community, there's probably several hundred primary  care doctors. For every sleep doctor, there's probably several hundred primary care doc -  tors. I don't have the relationships with every primary care doctor in the Boise and Salt  Lake area. I guarantee you that the primary care doctors in Boise and Salt Lake, that the  vast majority of them have no idea who I am, have never heard of me before. The sleep  community does know who I am, but the primary care community, some of them do, but  most of them wouldn't. Maybe some of them have seen our name on a letter because we  copy the primary care doctor. I'll talk about that in a minute. But my point there is there's  lots of doctors for you to work with, even if there's someone who has a practice like mine  in your area and they seem to have a monopoly on those relationships. There's still other  doctors who you can work with. So put your time in there. The base of your pyramid, if it is  doctor referrals, that's going to be super duper strong. By the way, one of the reasons it's  also super duper strong is as you start doing this, you will have... You get your first medical  doctor sending you patients for sleep apnea, let's say, or an ear, nose and throat doctor  sending you patients for TMJ problems.  [0:07:59]  And all of a sudden you'll get a referral from a medical doctor you've never heard of be -  fore. Why that is, is because these medical doctors talk to each other and someone say -  ing, "Oh, yeah, ENT doctor, you must get people with these crazy TMJ problems. What do  you do with them?". "Oh, I send them over to Dr. Spencer". "Oh, okay. Who's that?" "Oh  yeah. As, the center for sleep apnea and TMJ". "All right, cool". And then they send to the  center for sleep apnea and TMJ. We get referrals every week from dentists and doctors  we've never met just because they are going on the reputation of another doctor who  refers to us saying that this is the place to go. Spend the majority of your time and re -  09/01/25   Page   of 3   20

SSC 2.0 - 401: Marketing that Works Part 1  sources, which mostly it's going to be a resource of time, not money, at the base of the  pyramid, doctor referrals.  Patient Referrals   [0:08:50]  Next up, patient referrals. Based on the same aspect of pre-framing and trust, when a pa -  tient sends a friend of theirs or a family member to you, that person is very likely to go into  treatment with you. They've already been told everything. The patient has said how much  it costs. They've said if it's covered by insurance or not. And so the patient's coming in  ready to roll because they already kind of know the reasons that they might stay away. A  patient referral, that's why it's so strong. And that's why the case acceptance on those pa -  tients is so high is there's no surprises. They already asked those questions. If money was  their chief concern or insurance coverage was their chief concern, they already asked  about it. The doctor referrals, sometimes that patient doesn't ask those questions. So then  that's getting into your practice and the marketing of how the front desk treats them and  how you interact with that initial referral. But a patient referral, on the other hand, they al -  ready know. Now, the only reason it's not the base of the pyramid here is your patients  aren't out there every day interacting with people that may have a problem that you help.  Well, they may be doing that, but they're not talking about it. Okay, so a medical doctor,  clearly every patient that comes in, what's your problem? Let me take your history, what -  ever. Oh, you might have a sleep apnea problem. You've already given up on sleep apnea.  [0:10:16]  Oh, well, I've got someone I can send you to. Oh, that ear pain? That's not actually your  ear. That's a TMJ problem. Let me send you to my friend that does this. That's why doctor  referrals are the base of the pyramid. Patient referrals are awesome. Just doctors are go -  ing to see infinitely more people than a patient is going to see in their normal day-to-day  life.  Website and Google   [0:10:36]  Next, website and Google. This is very important. Why? Because the people lower down  here, so the people referred by doctors, the people even referred by a friend, are probably  going to Google you. They're probably going to look at your website. Depending on their  age, they are probably going to go to your website looking for a form fill to set up an ap -  pointment because they aren't comfortable picking up the phone. Okay, so anyone kind of  below 30 years old, that's what they're, well, probably even older than that now. So anyone  below, let's say, 35 years old, they're not looking for a phone number to call. Now, people  my age get kind of turned off by web form stuff and things like that. We're just looking like  for a phone number.  09/01/25   Page   of 4   20

SSC 2.0 - 401: Marketing that Works Part 1  [0:11:27]  And again, if you're anywhere close to my age sometimes it's frustrating because you go  to these companies you can't even find. There is no contact us is start a chat. And nowa -  days it's start a chat with a chat bot. It's AI that you're interacting with. That sucks. So I  want to get a human on the phone, right? But then again, nowadays, that human on the  phone might be in a completely different country. So you want your website and Google to  be really strong. And with the examples I just gave right there, you might hit both. So on  our websites, we have the web form, we have the fill form and be able to set up an ap -  pointment and interact with us. We have the chat, but we also have call now. And it's like  right there up front. Here's the phone number. And guess what? When somebody calls that  phone number, they get a real human that's sitting there in our office answering their ques -  tions. Spend some money here, making sure that your presence on Google, if someone  searches for dental sleep medicine, TMJ problems, things like that in your town, that you  come up on that first page. If you're not on the first page, then you don't exist as far as the  internet is concerned and as far as people looking for you are concerned.  [0:12:41]  Now, granted, this can be a little harder when you have someone like myself in your town,  because we tend to also kind of own the internet in that space. And that's all right. Be -  cause if you're anywhere on there and you go on the little map and it shows Center for  Sleep Apnea and TMJ, but that's clear on the other side of town and your practice is near  them, they won't tend to go into the detail of each practice and all that kind of stuff. They'll  just be like, oh, well, this one's close to me. Looks like they do what I'm looking for. Cool.  But once again, the main reason for the website and the Google is not necessarily people  just searching. That is good to have that presence there. The main reason is Dr. Smith,  ENT, referred me to you. I'm going to look you up. If for the least of it, just wondering  where you are. And then when I look you up, I want to see clearly, very quickly, I'm in the  right place. That's what your Google, your SEO should be focused at. Your website should  be focused at.  [0:13:58]  Now, as of the recording of this, my sons, Jake and Josh, do a lot of this for Spencer Study  Club members. They built a company around this and they are absolutely the experts in  their field for this niche and are very affordable. So if you need something like that and you  haven't heard of that already, please reach out to me and I can connect you with them. But  that is something you want to take seriously. Again, not necessarily because we're super  concerned about people Googling dental sleep medicine in your area and finding you as  the number one result, but more that anyone who refers to you, that person who's been  referred, they're going to check you out and they need to have a consistency with your  website.  Target Market   [0:14:41]  09/01/25   Page   of 5   20

SSC 2.0 - 401: Marketing that Works Part 1  Next, we have our target market. And I'll talk more about this target market in a moment,  but this is us going after specific individuals, not a mass market, which is next. Going after  our target market is going to be less expensive and more effective. Going after a mass  market, that starts to be problematic. And that's because we are then, let's say, educating  people on sleep, the value of sleep. Now, that's cool. That's nice of you to do that. But if  you are spending time and money on doing that, the patients that are going to kind of filter  out from that, that you're just talking about the value of a good night's sleep, and then from  there, we have to go to, well, do you snore? Do you possibly have sleep apnea? Okay, you  do. Well, now I need to get you for a diagnosis, and then you needed to get diagnosed.  And then maybe you're a candidate for appliance, maybe you aren't. And then eventually,  we go from here of sleep's important to oral appliance therapy. That's a long ways away.  And many people may not get there. But in the meantime, you and your team have used a  lot of energy taking phone calls or whatever about the value of a good night's sleep ad that  you did, or that spot you did on the local TV channel that got a lot of interest, but it's not  your target market. Okay, your target market, we'll talk about in just a moment. So on this  pyramid of marketing, we have effort going increasing on that left-hand side there.  Mass Market   [0:16:21]  Okay, so the greater, the easiest mass market. You buy some ads, you pay someone like  my sons to do Facebook ads for you, Google ads for you, things like that. No problem. All  you had to do was just give them a credit card number, took very, very little of your time.  You know, maybe you okay some ads or something like that, and they're going to do  everything else for you. So the effort is minimal on mass market. And then as we go down  to the base of the pyramid, the effort gets higher and is more personalized. So when we  get down to doctor referrals, that's pretty much all you. That needs to be you, the doctor,  going out, making these connections with other doctors, doing the things that's going to  increase the doctor referrals. And that's also you as the treating doctor, because a doctor's  not going to refer you multiple patients if the patient has a bad experience with your office  team or you personally. So the effort is the highest at the bottom, but the reward is the  greatest. The cost goes up as we go along. So the doctor referrals, and this is taking into  account or not taking into account rather your time.  [0:17:30]  So if you did put a value on your personal time, then the bottom of the pyramid is going to  be somewhat costly. However, not the same way. Most of the time when we are building  our practices, we're not charging the practice that I went out and did a lunch and learn with  the doctor. And therefore that was a thousand dollars an hour and I'm charging the prac -  tice for that. That's not how we really work, right? Which speaking of which, by the way,  this is one of the reasons that it's difficult, if not flat out impossible for DSOs to do sleep  09/01/25   Page   of 6   20

SSC 2.0 - 401: Marketing that Works Part 1  and TMD in their practices is because the base of the pyramid for sleep and TMD is doctor  referrals. And DSOs aren't good at creating those relationships with doctors in the com -  munity. They're isolated and not necessarily always isolated by choice, but they just are.  You probably don't interact with the DSOs and DSOs will often have their own specialists  in house. So they may not refer anyone outside of their system. And that kind of creates  an isolation, an island of that group. And most DSOs are 99% regular dentistry. And so if  they dip their toe into this world of sleep and TMD, which is far more medical, they can do  okay by getting referrals from their own sources, from their own dentists. But as soon as  we now need to be collaborative with our medical community, it kind of falls down. The  dentist might refer out to the local medical community for testing and diagnosis and stuff  like that. And then guess what's going to happen? Those patients are going to be referred  to someone like me or you because we have the relationships. So this is one of the rea -  sons that they tend to fall down. So I hope that this makes sense to you.  [0:19:24]  This might be something you want to kind of take a screen capture, print this out, have this  sitting around. But the bottom line is I want you to remember here, doctor referrals are the  base of the pyramid. And this is for everyone, okay? Not just practices that are limited.  This is for everyone. And one medical doctor can change your practice. Just one. One  medical doctor is probably seen multiple patients per day that could be referred to you.  Probably more than you could handle. Ultimately, you can then get more doctors as this is  building your practice, as your capacity changes, things like that.  [0:20:07]  You just need to keep going out there and getting more of those doctor referrals. Our prac -  tices, we spend basically no money at all on any of the marketing as we go up this pyra -  mid. So mass market, we don't spend a dime on Facebook ads or anything like that. We  do spend some money on our website and Google making sure that patients are clear that  they're in the right place when they go to our website, making sure that looks nice, making  sure that it communicates to both the young people that don't want to talk to a human and  the older people who only want to talk to a human. We do spend money there, but we  don't spend any money on external marketing in the traditional sense. Now, I'm going to  tell you that we have in the past and show you exactly what we did, and that may be  something that you want to do too. But this, the base of the pyramid, doctor referrals, once  you've built that base of the pyramid strong enough, then you don't need to do any target  market or mass market because you just have all of these patients coming in.   The patients  that are coming in are your target market. They already know that they have a TMJ prob -  lem, a sleep apnea problem. That's why they're being sent in by the referrals in the first  place. Okay, so hopefully that helps you.  Internal Marketing   [0:21:17]  09/01/25   Page   of 7   20

SSC 2.0 - 401: Marketing that Works Part 1  For internal marketing, there are various things you can do. There are brochures from the  Academy of Sleep Medicine, the Academy of Dental Sleep Medicine. There's things that  we've created ourselves over the years. We've had posters that we created and actually  Spencer Study Club members bought those for a while. We don't do those anymore. So  there's all sorts of stuff like that. However, my main suggestion for you for internal market -  ing is stuff like this, is stories that can be printed out from internet sites and you just print  this out and you're like, hey, check this out. Here's the top one here. Celebrities with sleep  apnea. Rick Perry and whatever with the condition. Center of the screen there. Here's why  Jimmy Fallon is the latest celebrity to take up mouth taping despite experts' warnings. So  this one down here, I don't know who that is, but died of OSA says if you snore, you should  be at least aware of obstructive sleep apnea as it can kill.  [0:22:21]  Okay, this is big deal and these things are current. So as you see some of these are older,  some of these are newer or more recent. Well, this stuff happens all the time. So here's a  little pearl that I find a lot of dentists are not aware of. And this has been around for a long,  long, long time. And there's probably other things you can do nowadays that are maybe  even better. But a simple tool is what's called Google Alerts. And wouldn't be surprised at  all if you're like, what? Never heard of that. So Google Alerts, just Google, Google Alerts.  And then you're going to come to a page that you put in your email address and whatever  topic or topics that you're interested in. And you're going to get a curated email from  Google pretty much every day on that topic. So for example, I have sleep apnea is one of  the topics that I get an email on where it's stories in the news on sleep apnea. And this  happens pretty much every day. Regenerative medicine, TMJ problems, and then another  one that I do is my name. Now, Jamison Spencer almost never comes up and that's fine  by me.  [0:23:32]  But if my name is used out there in the internet world, then typically I know about it. And  usually it's somebody advertising a course where I'm speaking or something like that. But  the point is, if you have this, so I get literally an email every day about some story about  sleep apnea. And I can briefly look at it, just the headlines. And then if something catches  my eye, which it rarely does, but if a couple times a month I'll be like, oh, that looks inter -  esting. Click on that and then be like, hey, I'll send that article to my office team in our  Boise and Salt Lake practices and say, hey, print this out and have it out for patients in the  waiting room. So we've got information that is current, timely, oftentimes celebrity-oriented  in our waiting room on sleep apnea. And that is pretty awesome. So I think that's a million  times better than a brochure. Brochures come across as either one of two things, salesy,  and we don't want that, or super boring and academic. And we don't necessarily want that.  Not necessarily bad to have the Academy of Sleep Medicine or the Academy of Dental  Sleep Medicine brochure there that does give to some people a sense of authority and  credibility.  [0:24:47]  09/01/25   Page   of 8   20

SSC 2.0 - 401: Marketing that Works Part 1  You don't really need that by the time they're in your office. They assume that you know  what you're doing and you're a doctor and stuff, so they're gonna give you that credibility.  So you've got that already. So then to give them a little bit of pop culture, hey, whoa, look,  Jimmy Fallon is taping his mouth, stuff like that. It's like, oh, interesting, I wonder what  that's all about. When Carrie Fisher died, it was said that it was related to sleep apnea.  When Justice Antonin Scalia died, they mentioned in the headlines that he was not using a  CPAP machine and was found dead. This stuff is important to impress upon the patient  that this could be a problem. So look for things like this, and you can kind of create an  even catalog in your own office, and then when this comes up with your patients, if you are  a restorative dentist and something comes up, I can be like, oh, did you see that article  about whatever, about this guy who died, and they connected it with his obstructive sleep  apnea that I think you might have too?  [0:25:49]  Here, let me give that to you. And that will help them to see that, okay, this isn't something  my dentist is making up. This is something that's out there. This is better, in my opinion,  than any of these other posters and stuff like that that kind of seem salesy. Don't seem  salesy. That's my suggestion. Now, here's something that was produced many years ago,  but it's quite good, and this is something you could actually share with your patient. And  once again, this is making it more normal. Like, oh I'm not a freak that I have this sleep  apnea problem. This is why the doctors and Harvard put this together, was to create that  goodwill in the community of like, oh, okay, well, if Shaquille O'Neal has this problem, he  seems pretty cool, and maybe it's okay for me to have this problem too. Now, the only sort  of problem with Shaquille O'Neal is he is a pitch man for every product that there is. And  good for him. He's been really smart that way. But on the other hand, he's a likable guy  and comes across as real genuine, even though he's a pitch man for everything.  [0:27:09]  But with this marketing piece, it's real. This isn't made up like maybe some of the other  stuff that he does. This is clearly real. Let's go ahead and watch this.  [video playback]  Shaq:   I snore?  Shaq’s wife:   Yeah.  Shaq:   I don't know if I snore because I don't hear myself.  Shaq’s wife:   He hears himself because sometimes it wakes him up. He's like, baby, “was I  snoring?"   Yeah, you were snoring.   It usually happens when he's on his back and then he  will just, he gets into that deep snore like the, I mean, it's deep.   Then he stops. His chest  will stop moving and everything.   He just snores.   That's what he does. like he was not  breathing.   So I nudged him, I'm like, “babe, wake up”.   And then he'd catch his breath. I'm  like, “dude, you just stopped breathing   and you're asleep.”   And I saved him.  09/01/25   Page   of 9   20

SSC 2.0 - 401: Marketing that Works Part 1  Doctor 1:   Pam’s a registered polysomnographic technician.  Shaq:   Poly what?  Doctor 1:   Polysomnographic means sleep study.   She'll be the one putting the electrodes  in.  Doctor 2:   Sleep apnea actually is a pretty common condition,   which is most likely under-  diagnosed and under-evaluated   because many people don't realize that they have it.  Shaq:   Well, every time I stop breathing,   she's, you know, the next morning,   “yeah, sleep  apnea.   Yeah, sleep apnea.”I'm like, what is sleep apnea?  Doctor 2:   Well, sleep apnea is a condition where   a person is unable to get air into their  lungs   when they fall asleep.  Doctor 1:   Every time the person stops breathing, they wake up.   They stop breathing, they  wake up.  Doctor 3:   And that exposes the body to a myriad   of really adverse stresses.  Doctor 1:   And that does have consequences.  Doctor 4:   Irritability, can't focus and maintain attention.  Doctor 2:   They’re unable to sleep in the same bedroom   with their bed partner or spouse.  Doctor 1:   There’s about a seven-fold increased risk   of motor vehicle accidents.  Doctor 4:   It’s linked with the obesity epidemic   to being linked with cardiovascular or heart  disease.  Doctor 3:   High rates of stroke, diabetes, and even mortality.  Shaq:   And so now, so now we gotta fix it.   Don't wanna go out like that.  Doctor C:   So Shaq, one of the things that we talked about.  Shaq:   I’m meeting with the sleep doctor, my main man, Dr. C.   He said he wanted me to be  part of his sleep study.  09/01/25   Page   of 10   20

SSC 2.0 - 401: Marketing that Works Part 1  Doctor C:   We arranged for an overnight recording   in which we could actually find  out   whether Mr. O'Neal has sleep apnea.  Shaq:   So tonight, electrodes on the head.   Now they're gonna study the  brainwaves.   Hopefully my REMs and my non-REMs. See, I read that, my rapid eye  movements.  Shaq’s wife:   Oh, and the end of the what?  Shaq:   Non-REM movement, so you know,   hopefully I don't have it, but if I do have it,   you  know, I know I'm working with the best people   to, you know, get a cure.   (  Doctor 1:   You all ready to go to sleep?  Shaq :   Yes, sir.  Doctor 1:   Okay, good luck with everything.   We'll be here monitoring.  Doctor 4:   So the evaluation of sleep apnea   is a test while they're asleep. And every  second of the study will be looked at.   Then the physician will interpret and make a  conclusion.  Doctor 1:   To cut to the chase, you have moderate sleep apnea here.  Doctor 2:   Obstructive sleep apnea is a chronic condition   which is eminently treatable.  Shaq:   All right, so you said there's the mask,   the mouthpiece, and surgery.  Doctor 1:   Correct. The treatment of choice as of today for sleep apnea   is to go ahead with  nasal sleep apnea mask.  Shaq:   And is this forever treatment or is this a six-week thing?  Doctor C:   We generally regard this as lifelong treatment.  Doctor 4:   Getting a mask to fit effectively   is often a cardinal part of effective treatment.  Shaq:   I have a mask here that I can look at.  Doctor 2:   If a person's able to use the CPAP device,   it works almost 100% of the time.  Shaq:   Oh, yeah, this is pretty good. This is nice, I like it.   Can I wear it to the club?  09/01/25   Page   of 11   20

SSC 2.0 - 401: Marketing that Works Part 1  Doctor 1:   Yeah, absolutely.  Shaq:   Oh, this is nice.  Doctor 1:   Okay, good.  Shaq:   I’ll do it.   Since I've met with Dr. C and, you know,   I've been getting at least seven,  eight, nine hours   of sleep a day, feel good. The weight is good, got a lot of energy.   The  relationship is good.   At the house, everything is working.  [end of video playback]  [0:31:37]  As you are connecting with your own patients in your practice, one of the reasons that I  encourage you to screen everyone is because everyone knows someone with sleep ap -  nea. Whenever I travel to lecture, which is usually a couple of times a month, I'll often take  Ubers and the Uber driver will be like, oh what are you doing in town? And I'll say, well, I  teach dentists about sleep apnea and TMJ problems. And I would say eight times out of  10, the Uber driver will either say, oh, I have sleep apnea, which should make us all slight -  ly concerned that the drivers of the cars that we're in could potentially fall asleep if they're  not treating their sleep apnea. But that happens a lot. Or they'll say, oh, my dad or oh, my  brother or someone else. They will always say someone within one degree of separation  that has sleep apnea. And then they'll usually follow up with, well, what does a dentist do  with that? Because I know that I was given a mask or I tried CPAP and I couldn't tolerate it  or my dad has the mask and he doesn't really like it that much. Everybody knows some -  body with sleep apnea. So as you screen all of your patients, don't just leave it at the per -  son in the chair. Make sure that you're talking to them about any other loved ones that they  have who might have this problem.  2 Patients Per Day   [0:33:09]  I think a reasonable goal for you to have if you are building your practice, if dental sleep  medicine is relatively new to you, is two patients a day to refer for a consultation with their  primary care doctor. If you're doing the primary care doctor model and then the primary  care doctor can refer them to the sleep lab and stuff like that or use a home sleep testing  company, whatever you kind of set up there, or to the sleep doctor if you are building that  relationship or have that relationship with a local sleep doctor. There really should for sure  be one low-hanging fruit patient in the morning and one in the afternoon. That'd be two a  day. You're going to have more than that, but as starting out so that you don't overwhelm  the system and have capacity issues immediately and have an issue, I would look for one  real obvious person in the morning and one real obvious person in the afternoon.  09/01/25   Page   of 12   20

SSC 2.0 - 401: Marketing that Works Part 1  [0:34:07]  And then perhaps you actually literally keep a list of the everyone else. So you'll have your  real obvious ones. And remember, I talked about this in other sessions, but remember you  want to send really good people as you're building this relationship with the doctors in your  community. You want to send people who you know they're going to go. They're going to  be excited to hear that the doctor wants them to get a sleep study. They're going to get  that and they're excited for the opportunity to be treated. Be that CPAP or appliance or  whatever. Those are the people you want to refer at first and you might just keep notes  someplace. You make a little list of your patients that you're pretty sure have sleep apnea.  You weren't positive that they were the 100% best referral yet, but then down the road you  could market directly to those people that you've already evaluated per se.  [0:35:12]  You know, you kind of look, I couldn't see down the throat. They'd have this, this, this, this.  Pretty sure they have sleep apnea. Wasn't appropriate to talk to them right at that second,  but I am going to reach out to them a few months down the road once we have our sys -  tems in place. You don't necessarily need to wait for them to come back around in recall to  have that conversation. You could just make a note and then talk to them a little bit later.  Patients Who Won’t Go to See a Sleep Doctor   [0:35:36]  Remember, what do we do with patients who won't go to see a sleep doctor or the primary  care doctor? Well, we do have an option there and that is tell them that you might be able  to treat them for their snoring or ideally, remember me talking about this before, their brux -  ism. So ideally we are treating their bruxism with a state-of-the-art appliance which is only  mandibular advancement devices and remember that even though that's their name, we  don't need to advance the mandible. We just need to keep the jaw from falling backwards.  So really a mandibular stabilization appliance that is state-of-the-art for reducing rhythmic  mastoid muscle activity or the muscle activity of bruxism.  [0:36:22]  So you could talk about, "hey, I can fit you with an appliance more directed to protecting  your teeth. It's not directed at treating sleep apnea because we don't even know if you  have sleep apnea. Directed at protecting your teeth. By the way, not covered all by your  insurance. What do you want to do?" So if they agree to that, then I would contact their  family doctor, have that conversation. "Hey, Jamison came in. I can't see down his throat.  He says he snores. He says his wife says that he stops breathing. I talked to him about  seeing you for a possible consultation to maybe see if a sleep study is indicated. He said  no way, no how is he getting a sleep study. He would like me to fit him with an oral appli -  ance to protect his teeth and I was going to give him one that keeps his jaw from falling  backwards that might actually help if there is an underlying problem here. At least it won't  09/01/25   Page   of 13   20

SSC 2.0 - 401: Marketing that Works Part 1  make him worse. What do you think we should do, doc?" In my experience, the vast ma -  jority of primary care doctors will be like, "yeah, that sounds good. Go for it"  [0:37:19]  "I don't see anything here in Jamison's medical history that would indicate sleep apnea.  He's a thinner dude, so probably not a thing for him". Or they'll also say, well, "most of my  patients don't use their CPAP anyway, so might as well just go ahead and try this". And  usually they'll say, "hey, by the way, could I send you other patients? Because if you're do -  ing those oral appliance things, that'd be cool because I have a lot of patients that don't  use their CPAP". Now, if they do say, yeah, just go for it. Let's go ahead and treat him.  Then I think you also ask just to completely cover yourself. Hey, doc, technically these oral  appliances that we're using are FDA cleared for sleep apnea and snoring and they're pre -  scription only. Would it be possible for you to write a little script, oral appliance for patients  snoring, shoot that over, just go ahead and have that in our records so that we know that  we've talked. The vast majority of the time that doctor is going to be like, yeah, that's fine.  On the other hand, if they have no clue who you are, have never worked with you before,  they may not be comfortable doing that.  [0:38:25]  If they aren't comfortable doing that, you just at least note in your chart, note in your  records, of course, I should do this nowadays, you would put into the chart note that you  spoke with the patient's primary care doctor about a possible sleep study and the primary  care doctor does not feel that's indicated at this time. Remember, it's the medical doctor  that's sending the patient for the sleep study. So if they don't want to do it, if they don't  think that that's necessary, then you would be protected in that case. Ideally this is my  family member. I want them to get the study so that we know what we're actually treating.  But there are some people that are going to be tough to get them to do those things be -  cause they just don't want to.  Keep Trying   [0:39:10]  Now, here's the cool thing, though, about you being a restorative dentist, a general dentist,  if you are, is you don't just get one bite at the apple here. So keep trying. If the patient  says like, "Eh, no, I'm not really interested in going to see the doctor you work with for a  consultation or whatever that stuff," that's okay. This might be actually where you pull out  one of those marketing pieces, those articles that you're like, "Hey, well I saw this news  article and it was someone that kind of reminds me of you. There was like this famous per -  son and yeah, unfortunately, they died related to sleep apnea. Hey, Marsha, could you get  that article on whoever, Justice Scalia or whatever?" And they grab that and you're like,  "Hey, just check this out. We'll talk about this next time you come in. But I just want you to  be aware of this. We've been asked by the ADA to screen all of our patients for possible  sleep-related breathing disorders, just like we screen people for head and neck cancer. I  09/01/25   Page   of 14   20

SSC 2.0 - 401: Marketing that Works Part 1  think you might have a problem, but check this out. We'll talk about it next time." And that's  it. Don't be pushy because the cool thing is your patients, who no one trusts you, they  come back every six months or every year or every whatever for their recall. And often -  times what happens if you plant that seed and you give them a little information and they  actually look at it really at all, then they have a friend who dies of a heart attack at 42 years  old or something, or something else happens. Or they're driving home from work and  they're in bumper-to-bumper traffic and they actually nod off. And they're like, "Oh my  gosh, you got to be kidding me.  [0:40:51]  I wonder if that dentist was right. I wonder if I've got this problem." Something's going to  happen and you're going to have some of these patients call you up and be like, "Hey doc,  I know you brought this up last time I was in there and XYZ happened. I'm ready to do  something now." So don't give up if the person's just like, "I'm not that interested."  External Marketing   [0:41:12]  All right, now let's talk about external marketing. And like this little joke here, our target  market is men and women ages 18 to 75. Now that is kind of our target market, so to  speak, but that's really tough. That's really tough to market to such a group. And when we  are thinking of marketing, I don't want you to just cast these broad nets and catch whatev -  er happens to be around because that just creates a lot of work for your team and frustra -  tion and patients that you now have to direct to somewhere because you can't actually  help them. You can't provide all of the things that they're going to need or want. So we  want to be more focused. And this is why the splash for this presentation is Spearfisher -  men.  [0:42:00]  So the difference between a Spearfisherman versus a Net Fisherman is the Spearfisher -  man only shoots what they want to eat. They're looking for a specific species of fish and  oftentimes a specific size of fish, and they are doing that very deliberately. And that's what  they're going for. And if they get something, it's going to be what they're going for. And if  they don't get something, it's because they didn't see what they were going for. Very, very,  very different than just, hey, let's cast this big net out here, see if we get lucky, see if what  comes up is what we want. And oh, then, oh, by the way, we caught all this other stuff and  hopefully it didn't hurt it too bad or whatever. We didn't didn't cause any damage. I want  you to be the Spearfisher when it comes to external marketing.  Inspire   [0:42:48]  09/01/25   Page   of 15   20

SSC 2.0 - 401: Marketing that Works Part 1  Now, here's a company that has done, frankly, a fabulous job with external marketing. And  I believe that there's a few things at foot that have created this, but we can actually give  Inspire some credit for people being aware of sleep apnea and being aware of alternatives  to CPAP. And one of my principles with external marketing is, remember this, write this  down, perhaps, put this on a post-it note, if you're ever going to do external marketing, you  need to remember this sentence. “Do your external marketing as if the only person who  will ever see it or hear it is your number one referring doctor”. Create external marketing  with the thought process that the only person who will ever see this or hear it is your num -  ber one referring doctor. What do I mean by that? I mean, you want something that is not  offensive towards them. So as I've talked about in the past or in other sessions here, what  do pulmonary critical care doctors who become sleep doctors, what do they tend to really  like? CPAP. So the ads I'm about to show you from Inspire are kind of anti-CPAP. I would  never do such an ad. Now I'm going to show you some ads that we've done and I'm going  to play you some radio ads that we've done. And we will target people who can't tolerate  their CPAP, but we don't ever make CPAP bad or negative because my referring doctors  like CPAP.  [0:44:42]  They put their patients on CPAP all the time. So keep that in mind. Now back to Inspire. So  Inspire has done a good job, I think, because they spend millions and millions of dollars on  marketing and our older generation is seeing these ads on like normal TV. Younger people  now, myself included in that mix, almost never watch normal TV anymore. The only reason  I know that these commercials exist, as a matter of fact, is when I travel, I might turn on a  news channel and just have it playing in the background or while I'm getting ready or  whatever, and I will almost always see an Inspire commercial. So that's mixed in in the ro -  tation of the drug commercials and stuff like that, and so I'll see these and they're really  well done. So let's watch a few of these. But my point is, I think that we can actually credit  them for increasing the patient awareness out there, and something is changing in the  world of all this stuff, and I'm really excited about it. So just this past weekend, as I'm  recording this, in June of 2025, I was giving a course with Gordon Christensen's group,  and I was going around the room with all of the attendees of that and asking them, which I  often do with a more focused small group courses.  [0:46:06]  This was a hands-on two-day course, so it was a small group of dentists. And I go around  and I ask them, "Why are you here and what do you hope to get out of this?" And I had  someone say, "Well, the reason I'm here is because I have patients asking me if I can help  them with their sleep apnea and sometimes with their snoring". I was like, "Oh, that's cool".  And I thought, oh, that's interesting, because normally it's like I talked about a few minutes  ago where you have patients that are like, yeah, I'm not interested. I don't want to do that. I  don't want to go through that. That's more normal, frankly, historically, is it's like a discon -  nect. The patient came in to you for dental stuff, and all of a sudden you're talking about  airway, sleep apnea. What the heck? That's weird. Why are you talking about this medical  problem in a dental office? That's been historically the case, and you may still find that with  09/01/25   Page   of 16   20

SSC 2.0 - 401: Marketing that Works Part 1  a lot of your patients. However, this one dentist says, "Yeah, I got patients asking about it".  I'm like, all right. And then a second person said the same thing.  [0:47:08]  And I was like, "Wait, hold up here. You're telling me that on a pretty routine basis, you  have patients asking you, can you help me with my sleep apnea and snoring?" And they're  like, yeah, like regular, at least weekly. Like, hmm. And then two more people said the  same thing. Okay, this was amazing to me. And who knows? Maybe you have had the  same experience. Maybe that's why you're here now, you're like, yeah, I've got people ask -  ing about this. Maybe Inspire and a few other people that are spending bajillions of dollars  on advertising are the reason that is. So let's go ahead and watch a few of their ads. And  this is some beautiful marketing. And I'll come back and kind of explain why I think that is  too. But let's watch a couple of these ads real quick.  [video playback]  Man with CPAP Mask 1:   Let’s get started. Bill, where's your mask?  Bill:   I really tried sleeping with it, everybody, but I'm done struggling. Now I sleep with In -  spire.  Man with CPAP Mask 1:   Inspire?  Bill:   Inspire is a sleep apnea treatment that works inside my body with just a click of this  button.  Woman with CPAP Mask:   A button?  Man with CPAP Mask 2:   No mask?  Man with CPAP Mask 3:   No hose?  Bill:   Just sleep.  Man with CPAP Mask 1:   Yeah, but you need the hose, you need the air. You need the kr -  rrrrrkk.  Female voice:   Inspire. Sleep apnea innovation. Learn more at InspireSleep.com.  [2nd video playback]  Sleeping Man:   [Removed CPAP and Snoring loud]  09/01/25   Page   of 17   20

SSC 2.0 - 401: Marketing that Works Part 1  Female voice:   If you struggle with CPAP you should check out Inspire Inspire. Sleep ap -  nea innovation. Learn more at InspireSleep.com.  [3rd video playback]  Lady 1:   Because he was...  Lady 2:   Wait, wait, hold on. That new neighbor is hot.  Lady 1:   That's my husband.  Lady 2:   What?  Lady 1:   It's the Inspire implant he got. He's not struggling with CPAP anymore.  Lady 2:   Oh, that wrist is working wonders for him.  Lady 1:   And for me. Gotta go.  Lady 2:   Naughty girl.  Lady 1:   Hi, sweetie. Here comes the choo-choo train of love.  Female voice:   Inspire. Sleep apnea innovation. Learn more and view important safety in -  formation at InspireSleep.com.  [end of video playback]  [0:49:28]  So did you notice something about all of those commercials? They're well done, they're  funny, but did you notice what they actually don't mention? Surgery. So one says, yeah,  works in my body, but all they show is that little push of a button thing, that little remote  control. One, it kind of goes like this, but there's nothing about this is a surgical implant, it's  going to shock your tongue. None of that stuff is in there. Pretty brilliant. And again, they're  not super, well, yeah, they are kind of negative towards CPAP, right? And they're also tar -  geted the bed partner, didn't they? And that's brilliant, because a lot of people, it's the bed  partner. Remember me talking in level one about secondhand sleep apnea? Remember  that? So there are a lot of people that have secondhand sleep apnea, and a lot of people  even sleeping with someone on CPAP might still have some secondhand sleep apnea be -  cause they don't tolerate sleeping next to the machine well. So great, great, great market -  ing. And what's happening, and why I think people are asking their dentists these ques -  tions, is a lot of these people are finding out that it inspires a surgery. And that this thing's  09/01/25   Page   of 18   20

SSC 2.0 - 401: Marketing that Works Part 1  going to shock their tongue, and that they're going to have a scar right here on their neck.  And they're like, yikes, out.  [0:50:54]  You know, what other options are there? I've already tried CPAP, and then they're going to  Google and finding out that, oh, there's this oral appliance thing. Okay, so hats off to In -  spire for spending millions of dollars to educate people. But they are also, they're not cast -  ing out a net. Their commercial isn't about, are you feeling sleepy? Are you tired and fa -  tigued? Their commercial is targeted at people who don't like or aren't using their CPAP.  Okay, we're going to do the same thing.  Who and Where is the Low Hanging Fruit   [0:51:30]  Who and where is this low-hanging fruit? So those who have tried CPAP and given up.  This is why base of the pyramid is doctors, because doctors know. Sleep doctors for sure  know, primary care doctors know. Remember that the vast majority of sleep medicine that  is done, the pathway, is primary care doctor refers to sleep lab, gets the sleep study, sleep  doctor interprets the sleep study, sends back a report to primary care doctor, who then  puts the person on CPAP or sends them wherever they send them. They're the ones that  know. So they're the ones, the primary care doctor, when the patient comes back and  they're like, hey, how's it going with the CPAP?  [0:52:11]  They're like, sorry, I'm not using that anymore. Okay, so that's why we build our pyramid  with the doctors. DME companies, if you remember go back to the session if you haven't  watched it or if you haven't watched it for a while on working with sleep doctors and DME  companies. That's why I put those together. The sleep doctors and the DME companies  tend to know before anyone else that someone's given up on their CPAP because of that  tracking thing that DME companies have to do. Primary care doctors too, but the sleep  doctors, DME companies, they're going to know this is why we target them is the CPAP  failures, that's where they hang out, right? That's where the CPAP successes are too, but  where the CPAP users are, that's where we want to target. Okay, those who have had a  sleep study but didn't even try CPAP. When I've talked to sleep doctors and I say, hey,  what percentage of your patients are compliant with their CPAP? They'll often say 90%.  And I'll say, okay, right on, good for you. That's awesome. It sounds like you're doing an  amazing job. Curious doctor, do you ever have patients that won't even try CPAP in the  first place?  [0:53:18]  And they will always say, well yeah, we've got probably 5-10% of our patients who won't  even try it. Now, they didn't put that into their other calculation. So even the person who  believes that they've got a 90% compliance rate on CPAP will say that they have 5 or 10%,  they don't even try. So if you take that now, we've got 10% that give up, 10% that won't  09/01/25   Page   of 19   20

SSC 2.0 - 401: Marketing that Works Part 1  even try, we've got 20% now of their patients that are candidates for what you do for appli -  ance therapy. And then of course, to reiterate, I know I've said this many times, but it bears  repeating, in those cases I talk about helping that patient use their CPAP better, right?  That's always the first approach is, could we help more of your patients use their CPAP?  Inevitably though, you're going to have patients that will do an oral appliance and maybe  trying to use their CPAP, but they still don't like their CPAP. And guess what? They'll wear  the oral appliance without the CPAP and they're not snoring and they're feeling better, so  then they completely dump the CPAP. That happens all the time. So know that again,  sleep doctors, DME companies, because why they would know, this would be the patient  that a CPAP machine or an auto-PAP nowadays was delivered, because again, people  can have a sleep study, home sleep test, in lab, whatever, and oftentimes literally get the  PAP unit that day.  [0:54:50]  So like they wake up, they're kicked out of the sleep lab, or they do a home sleep test, it's  sent in for interpretation, it's done in minutes almost, DME company's alerted, and they're  going to get that PAP machine within a day, two, three, pretty fast. Oftentimes, as a matter  of fact, I was working with a dentist once and he went through the process locally to kind of  see what it was like because he was going to be referring patients into this system. And  he's like, yeah, I should do this myself. And he was pretty sure he had sleep apnea and  indeed he did. And he got his CPAP. He had a company reach out to him to say, hey per -  son's name, we've got your CPAP machine here. And he's like, what? They're like, yeah  doctor, whoever ordered a CPAP machine for you, when can we get this to you? And he's  like, I really don't know what you're talking about because I haven't talked to my doctor  about anything yet. So the DME company knew about this person's sleep apnea before  the person did. And he was pretty miffed about that, actually, because the doctor hadn't  even gone over his sleep study, but already this treatment was in route.  [0:56:02]  That is more the rule than the exception to the rule. It is very common for people to have  this machine sent to them. And again, nowadays, so back in the olden days, it used to be  that the patient would come back, it'd be titrated in the lab, there'd be someone there to  kind of help them out with the mask fit, like live the first time they'd had an experience, kind  of walk them through it, explain to them what's going on. This would be somebody that's  very pro CPAP and would be talking to them about some of the challenges they might  have, but really building it up, right? Now, the average patient just gets something that  shows up in the mail with a mask. Okay, well, what mask did they choose? Whatever mask  they had a lot of inventory of. That's the truth. And for that patient to get another mask,  they have to ask for it. A lot of patients probably don't even know that there is another  mask. So there's probably 100 other masks. So this whole system is kind of screwed up.  But my point of all this is those are the places where they're going to know about the per -  son giving up base of the pyramid stuff. Okay, base of the pyramid stuff.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 20   20

