SSC 2.0 - 506: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 2  SSC 2.0   Level 5  506: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 2  [intro music]  Drugs That Affect Sleep   [0:00:12]  Now let's move on to drugs that affect sleep. And now we're gonna move a bit away from  our more pharmaceutical type of stuff or over-the-counter nutraceuticals and things like  that, like we've been talking about, and go into really, really popular drugs. And let's start  with the world's most popular drug, and that is caffeine.  Caffeine   [ 0:00:34]  Caffeine is the world's most popular drug. And does it affect sleep? Well, you bet it does.  So let's start off here by just talking about some caffeine content of popular drinks and then  through dark chocolate on the list here too, or I didn't throw it on here, but [laughter] this is  from the math department at utah.edu. So the University of Utah, that's kind of interesting  that they're the ones that came up with this, probably because all of the students in the  math department are taking massive amounts of caffeine, I bet. [chuckle] So this is not ter -  ribly dated per se, but some of these drinks, I'm not even sure they still exist anymore. But  at the time when this was published, Red Bull, that was the big holy cow crazy drug drink,  so to speak, 80 milligrams of caffeine in a serving. And then Jolt was right below that.  [0:01:33]  I remember when Jolt came out, and it was like, whoa, holy crap, Jolt compared to Moun -  tain Dew. Mountain Dew was really the big leader there with 55 milligrams of caffeine in a  can. And then Jolt came out and was like, geez, wow, a whopping not even quite 20 mil -  ligrams more of caffeine. Okay, so everything on this list here, these are all babies com -  pared to what we're about to talk about. But go through, so here's all of our different sodas  and stuff here. Diet Coke, very popular, 45 milligrams. Now coffee, drip coffee, 150, 175.  Brewed coffee, a little bit lower. Espresso, just two ounces is 100 milligrams. And then you  see there even with some ice cream and instant coffee and tea and green tea is actually  quite low in caffeine content, only 15 milligrams. Hot cocoa, very low in caffeine. And then  decaf, of course, is quite low, as you would hope. Dark chocolate, one ounce, which isn't  that much chocolate, 20 milligrams. So there is obviously caffeine in chocolate or dark  chocolate. Well, it's in all chocolate, it's just more in dark chocolate.  09/01/25   Page   of 1   12

SSC 2.0 - 506: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 2  [0:02:51]  Some of the effects of caffeine, so almost 99% of caffeine is absorbed and reaches peak  plasma concentrations in approximately one hour after consumption. And if you've read  the book, and I've encouraged you to get the book, Why We Sleep, in that book, Dr. Walk -  er talks about something called a nappuccino. I got to tell you, I love nappuccinos. Okay,  so the nappuccino is where you drink some caffeine, and this could be a soda, a coffee,  you know, whatever, anything with caffeine in it. I guess you could just eat some dark  chocolate if you wanted to. But you take in some caffeine, and then you take a nap. So  you do it quick, right? So you don't drink the caffeine, sit around for 45 minutes. That  wouldn't work here. So note the concentration is one hour after consumption. So the idea  here is you take in your caffeine, and you time it, so that about 30 minutes-ish after you've  started drinking that caffeine, you lay down for a nap. Then your nap is going to be in that  20-30 minute range. Can't go much longer than that, or you're going to screw up your  sleep. Much shorter than that, if you're, you know, hopefully it takes you a couple minutes  to go to sleep if you're taking a nap in the afternoon. If you would instantaneously go to  sleep when your head hits the pillow, that can be a problem too.  [0:04:20]  But bottom line, you take a nap, set your nap alarm, 25-30 minutes, and then you're gonna  wake up, and it's a double punch, right? So you got the caffeine hitting your system hard,  and you just got that refreshing nap in, and oh my gosh, okay? I love me a good nappuc -  cino. [laughter] Again, I don't do a nappuccino every day. I probably could if I wanted to  because of the lifestyle that I have been able to create, in part thanks to you allowing me  to teach people like you and to do that, that means I don't have to go to an office every day  to see patients, so I could do that. For you, is it possible that you could do that on certain  days or maybe literally every day in your practice? And yeah, maybe you could. So per -  haps you could have that hour lunch break, and you'd have to train your team on this  'cause they can't be coming in and waking you up and stuff.  [0:05:22]  I've heard of multiple dentists doing this. Multiple Spencer Study Club members do this, as  a matter of fact, where in their office they have either just their chair allows them to do this,  or they'll have like literally a cot or something they can lay down in, and they will eat their  lunch. They'll take in some caffeine. They take a nap, and then they wake up, and they just  feel like a million bucks. So that's a nappuccino. If you haven't done that before, you might  check it out, and that could be pretty cool. Now again, typically naps are gonna be best in  that about 1.30, 1 to 3-ish range. Earlier than that can kind of start screwing up your circa -  dian rhythm. Later than that can for sure start screwing up your circadian rhythm. But you  can read more about that in Why We Sleep. Nappuccino, pretty cool. Okay, other effects  here. Route of elimination through urine excretion and caffeine, as you know, is a diuretic.  So you will kind of urinate that out quicker. Rate of caffeine metabolism differs greatly with  half-life ranging from 2 hours to 12 hours.  [0:06:31]  09/01/25   Page   of 2   12

SSC 2.0 - 506: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 2  Hello. So this is, as I was talking about earlier, this is why there's individuals that have an  impact on this. And you may be the person that's like, "Yeah, caffeine doesn't affect me."  Okay, and you are probably right. Now there is some evidence out there that any amount  of caffeine does seem to disturb sleep. But that's tough to parse out in a bigger study. But  on an individual basis, you probably know this from personal experience. Either you're a  person that's very sensitive to caffeine or you're a person who's not sensitive to caffeine.  You know, you go out to dinner with folks and, you know, the waiter comes at the end of  dinner. "Hey, would anyone like a coffee or a tea," or something like that? And there will be  some people like, "Yeah, no, no, thank you. None for me, please." And then someone else  is like, "Yeah, I'll take a cappuccino." And you're like, "Wow, dude, it's like 9:30. You're tak -  ing a cappuccino right now? That seems bold." And that person's like, "Yeah, I can do this  and go to sleep. Because I've been doing it since I was 12 years old, you know, growing  up in Italy, and this is just what we do." That all needs to be taken into account.  [0:07:44]  But there is this wide range of half-life and metabolism, how your body metabolizes caf -  feine. This is gonna be dependent for your patients, too. Good rule of thumb, and we'll talk  about some of these things in the coming slides here, but good rules of thumb on con -  sumption of caffeine. But just keep in mind that for some people that may be more like my  wife, Jenny, that absolutely cannot take in caffeine after 2 o'clock in the afternoon, she  won't sleep. So she has more of this probably 12-hour half-life in her where it needs to be  out of her system.  Caffeine Comparison   [0:08:21]  Let's have a few more comparisons here of caffeine content of things that you may con -  sume yourself. So here's a Dunkin' Donuts versus Starbucks caffeine comparison are the  two largest producers or purveyors, rather, purveyors of caffeine in the world and particu -  larly in the United States. So here you'll see for each kind of individual drink the caffeine.  So we won't cover every one of these here, but just look at these kind of the regular cof -  fee, 210 milligrams for your Dunkin' Donuts, 310 for the Starbucks. Decaf, 10 milligrams  for Dunkin', 25 milligrams for Starbucks. Cold brew, there the Dunkin' Donuts won out at  260 versus 205. Cappuccino, very close to each other there. Latte, pretty darn close to  each other. Frozen coffee, notice that the Dunkin' Donuts is massively more than the  Frappuccino at Starbucks. So you can just kind of check these out. And who knows,  maybe some of the nuances there of the caffeine are perhaps why certain people like and  semi get addicted to these various drinks at various places. Because if you are going  someplace and it's like, "All right, man, I gotta have my frozen coffee every day from the  Dunkin' Donuts," well, that's 300 milligrams of caffeine. Okay, that's a lot of caffeine, right?  And you may not realize that where someone else is getting a Frappuccino and they'd  09/01/25   Page   of 3   12

SSC 2.0 - 506: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 2  have to have three Frappuccinos for the caffeine content of one frozen coffee at Dunkin'  Donuts.  Popular Energy Drinks   [0:10:21]  All right, now let's talk about some popular "energy drinks." And like I said before, that orig -  inal graphic that I showed you there of like the oh my gosh, you know, Jolt Soda, holy cow,  70 milligrams. Okay, those are baby stuff nowadays. So I may have told this story at one of  the other levels, but I'll tell it again here because it's relevant. One time I went on an army  post, and so, I ran a course for the army. Some of you watching this may have been partic -  ipants in that course. Colonel Philip Neal put together a so-called short course and I was  involved in that. It was really awesome. We did that for multiple years. And I think this was  like one of the first ones I ever did, because of this experience, I changed how I would  travel to these events, but at this event, I stayed on post. There's a lot of Holiday Inn  places that are on post. And if you're like, wow, Holiday Inn. I haven't stayed in a Holiday  Inn for a long time. Yeah, right? [laughter] And these haven't necessarily been that up -  graded either. So, one of the reasons that I started staying at my favorite brand, Marriott,  off post after this because, if I remember correctly, the hot water didn't work and had to be  moved to another room and all sorts of problems. But that's not part of the story.  [0:11:57]  The story is I get there and I'm thinking to myself, "Oh, you know, I'd like a soda. I'd like a  Coke Zero," or something like that, right? And so, I go over to the case there, the refriger -  ated case, and I go to get myself a soda. And I didn't recognize anything in the case. They  did not have Coke. They did not have Pepsi. They didn't have Mountain Dew. They didn't  have any of that stuff. The lowest caffeine content thing that they had in this large case  was Red Bull. And then, they had a whole bunch of drinks that I'd never heard of in my life.  And a lot of them are shown on this graphic here. And that was disturbing to me. So, the  people that would stay in that Holiday Inn on post typically were newer recruits and they've  been brought there or maybe they're there for some sort of training or whatever. But these  are military people and usually skew young, right? So, the main military age guy or gal is  18 to maybe 25 or whatever, that's kind of that main area there. And so, these are young  people obviously consuming unbelievable quantities of caffeine or they wouldn't be there.  [0:13:29]  So, they wouldn't provide every known energy drink if there wasn't a demand for it, right, at  this hotel. And then I started noticing this as well at other places on post. So, if you went to  kind of barracks, living quarters, if you went to the place where the soldiers shop, where  they eat, things like that, and there'd be options and there would be things like this. They're  just like, you got to be kidding me. Now, if you think about it though, it really makes sense  because when you're 18, 19 years old, remember that your circadian rhythm is skewed  late, okay? So, you want to be a night owl and you don't want to get up early, okay? So,  09/01/25   Page   of 4   12

SSC 2.0 - 506: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 2  there aren't a lot of 19-year-olds that are, "All right, 9:30, you got to hit the sack," and then  they're going to get their 10 hours of sleep, you know, and get up in the morning. This is  not how it works. So, when you're that age, it's more likely for you to not feel sleepy till  midnight, one o'clock perhaps, and then you would typically, and left to your own devices  and, you know, still staying in your mom's basement, you're gonna sleep till noon, okay?  You're gonna get more sleep 'cause your body still needs more sleep and you're gonna go  to bed later and you're gonna get up way later. That is normal for adolescents.  [0:14:56]  And now, we've got this 19-year-old that signs up with the army. The army does not have a  go-ahead-and-sleep-in schedule. That is tradition that they get up at 0 dark 30 and they  got to do their physical training and they got to do stuff like that and they got to be some -  where at 6:00 AM in formation, whatnot, and then they go back and get cleaned up for the  day and whatever, but they start early. Okay, these kids, so to speak, don't just automati -  cally change their circadian rhythm because they joined the military. So, that's where these  energy drinks come in, 'cause they all have screwed up sleep. They can't go to sleep until  late because they just can't. They got to get up really early. So, they're getting four or five  hours of sleep, perhaps, and their sleep's not that great. And they are supplementing their  sleepiness with caffeine. So, there's the whole story on that.  [0:15:53]  So, let's look at some of these. So, there's our standard can size and we'll start kind of  down here at the bottom. So, like I said, Red Bull on that first one I showed you, that was  the big one. You guys remember when this came out? It's like, holy crap, Red Bull, oh my  gosh. Okay, so then we started going up here with, you know, Kickstart and again, a bunch  of these that I've never even heard of before and maybe some of you have. So, even kind  of your natural sodas, so to speak, have a lot more caffeine in them than your typical run-  of-the-mill classic sodas, if you will. Okay, moving up the caffeine list here. So, here's one  that I do really like. So, Celsius. I was introduced to Celsius. I was addicted to Celsius, ac -  tually. Let's put it that way. Not quite addicted, but I was introduced to this drug at  Glidewell. And I spoke at Glidewell and they had this pretty can there and it's got like this  nice orange on there and stuff. And it says zero grams of carbs or sugar there. I'm like,  "That's cool. I don't drink sugar. So let me have one of those," and had that. I'm like, dang,  this tastes really good. And then I noticed a little bit later, about an hour later or so, that I  felt really great too. And I think I maybe drank more than one that day because they're not  big.  [0:17:25]  And then, at some point, I looked at how much caffeine it was. [chuckle] And as you see  here, it's 200 milligrams of caffeine in that serving. And it's not that big. So I knocked out  like 400 milligrams of caffeine. And I'm like, "Oh my gosh." And I don't think I was like, I'm  sure I was speaking. I wouldn't have been there if I wasn't speaking. But I can't remember  the context if I was there speaking just as one speaker or if I was doing this as more of a  full day thing or something like that. Nevertheless, I was like, okay, whoa, I need to be  careful with this. So now if you've been to a Spencer Study Club live before that is held at  09/01/25   Page   of 5   12

SSC 2.0 - 506: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 2  Glidewell, we've done multiple at Glidewell's headquarters there, I will see people with a  Celsius in front of them. And I'll be like, "Hey, you know what's in that can, right? So don't  just be slamming six of those. [chuckle] You're gonna have heart palpitations. We might  have a problem here."  [0:18:19]  And this is kind of one of the problems with these mass caffeine things. I don't know that  my wife has ever drunk a Celsius. I don't know that she'd be able to sleep for two or three  days if she could. Because again, she has to be careful with Diet Coke and stuff. And that  is much, much, much, much less caffeine. I think it was about 45 milligrams in a normal  can. So she'd have to drink what? Five, six cans of Diet Coke to get up to some of these  so-called energy drinks. Be careful with that. And there are some that are 300 milligrams. I  know that there's some that are even more than that.   There is a tolerance that builds up.  So people that do build up a tolerance for caffeine, then they do become more dependent  on caffeine. And there's a lot of information out there on how this is affecting our brains  and things like that. So not to be taken just completely with like a, "Yeah, you know, it's out  there, it is what it is," and stuff like that.  Caffeine Benefits   [0:19:23]  So let's talk about some caffeine benefits. So the benefits of caffeine, why you use caf -  feine, if you choose to use caffeine, is it increases alertness and focus. It enhances your  mood, physical performance. So there's a ton of these drinks now that are pre-workouts,  right? And there's pre-workout powders. And once again, if you're not familiar with what's  in that stuff, you need to just be aware that there's a boatload of caffeine in those things.  And that's the idea behind it, okay? So these pump workout things help people go to the  gym and they feel great and their mood is enhanced and they're able to put in a harder  workout. This is in all sorts of stuff. This isn't just in the gym.  [0:20:14]  So when I was running marathons, I would take caffeinated chews when I raced. And kind  of on these benefits here, let me give you kind of a story there really quick. So what I  would do when I would race, if I had a marathon two to three weeks before the marathon, I  would stop all consumption of caffeine. So I wouldn't drink sodas. I wouldn't drink anything  with caffeine in it or take anything with caffeine in it, no green tea supplements, nothing.  So nothing with caffeine in it at all for two weeks before a race. Then on race day, I had  this stuff that you'd put in water and it was a pretty high dose of caffeine. And that I would  drink as I was getting ready to start the race. And it had like some electrolytes stuff in it. So  I'm kind of preloading and I would sip on that, drink that, get done with that by the time the  race started. And that would kick in about an hour, 45 minutes to an hour into the race. At  the half marathon mark, I would start taking caffeinated chews. So these would have glu -  cose in them and caffeine. And I would do that basically every mile. I would take in another  09/01/25   Page   of 6   12

SSC 2.0 - 506: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 2  gummy bear basically that had caffeine and carbohydrates in it. And that's how I would fuel  my marathons. And I tell you what, if you go without caffeine for a few weeks and then you  hit a big dose, all of this stuff, 100%. So that whole runner's high and things like that, that  can be induced, if you will, by caffeine. And during a race, if you've never done something  like that before, if you did a marathon once to finish a marathon, that's not what I'm talking  about. I'm talking about running a race where you're trying to keep a specific pace.  [0:22:18]  So at the time I was trying to run, you know, 7 minute 40 second miles for the entire  marathon, and it's hard, right? And especially when you get to that 15, 18 mile mark and  the wall and stuff like that, that wall is from one, lack of carbohydrates, but the main one is  to your brain. So you are tricking your brain, if you will, that like, no, I'm good with these  things that you're taking in. Okay. Now in the marathon of life, people are doing this stuff  too. But if you do it all the time, so the reason of that story there is to get the maximum ef -  fect, I had to go without it for a while, had to clean it out of my system so that bang, I got  that new caffeine user impact when I was gonna have a race. If you find that you have to  have your coffee, you have to do this, you have this dependence, then you could also  benefit actually from the benefits of caffeine by taking little caffeine holidays and not hav -  ing caffeine for a period of time, then that's going to increase the impact of that caffeine for  you, the positive aspects.  [0:23:33]  Okay, potential protective effects and then headache or migraine relief. So you'll, you  know, in Excedrin, medications like that, and there's some other medications that have caf -  feine as one of the things, that is because caffeine will also help it get into your blood sys -  tem quicker and then has these other impacts. Obviously caffeine withdrawals include  headache. So this is a little bit of a double-edged sword here that if you were taking Ex -  cedrin on a regular basis, you could start to have not necessarily rebound headaches, but  a headache because you're not taking in caffeine.  [0:24:00]  I remember I served a mission for our church back when I was, you know, 19 years old,  and I had pretty much lived on fully loaded Mountain Dew as a teenager, as many  teenagers did at the time. Remember Jolt was recently introduced when I was a teenager,  and I didn't like the taste of it. I didn't like Coke. I didn't like, I liked Dr. Pepper and Moun -  tain Dew, and that's it. And we would drink on a regular basis, me and my friends, 44-  ounce, you know, Mountain Dew or whatever with our Subway sandwich, and you'd go to  sleep right after taking all that caffeine. So I didn't really think it affected me that much.  Then I went into a place called the Missionary Training Center, and there was no caffeine  to be had. [laughter] There was no sodas available at that time. I think there is now, but at  that time where I was learning German and I was learning the things to prepare me to go  serve a mission in Germany, there was no caffeine on campus, and so I couldn't get any,  and I had headaches. And I went through caffeine withdrawals, and then after a couple  weeks of being there, then it all cleared up and I didn't have a problem. So just be aware  of that.  09/01/25   Page   of 7   12

SSC 2.0 - 506: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 2  Important Considerations   [0:25:20]  Some considerations with caffeine. Dosage less than 200 milligrams, ideally not more than  450 milligrams per day. Wow. So that's from a study in 2024, Pharmacology of Caffeine  and its effects on the human body. So you can kind of dig deeper into that study if you'd  like to learn more about that. Individual sensitivity as we've already talked about, and ex -  cessive caffeine intake can cause adverse effects, right? [chuckle] Timing not too close to  bedtime. And that will affect most people. So let's kind of talk more about that and getting  into the too much caffeine and some of the negative side effects of too much. And remem -  ber too much being more of an individual affair and taking into consideration that some  people can ramp up and have more of a tolerance for caffeine because they ingest so  much caffeine. All right. So some of the things that you're probably familiar with from per -  sonal experience, nervousness and jitters, sleep disruption, GI problems, so diarrhea, in -  creased heart rate and blood pressure, dehydration, headaches, anxiety, panic attacks,  dependence, loss of bladder control. Okay. I haven't had that one myself. Worsening of  existing conditions, weak bones. Whoa, that's not cool. So a lot of different things here.  [0:26:40]  This study here on caffeine intake and anxiety and meta-analysis. And that is kind of not  cool, right? So we have a ton of people taking in their frappuccinos or whatever. I think that  was one of the lower caffeine ones, but their iced coffee, that was a high one, taking in  their iced coffees and, you know, two in the afternoon, three in the afternoon. They're also  on anti-anxiety medications. They're taking sleeping pills. They're like, there's all of this  crossing stuff. I think that's completely crazy how we're doing that, where people are taking  drugs to be awake and then drugs to help them sleep. But that's super duper common. All  right.  Caffeine & Sleep   [0:27:22]  Caffeine's effect on sleep. Consuming caffeine prior to sleep reduces total sleep time,  sleep efficiency, increases sleep onset latency, in other words, it takes longer for you to go  to sleep, and wake after sleep onset. Okay. So not awesome with any of those things. Caf -  feine consumption alters subsequent sleep architecture with an increase of N1, reduction  of deep sleep, N3, N4. Interesting that in 2023, they were still using the terms N3 and N4.  It's usually just N3 nowadays, and nowadays being for about a decade. But nevertheless,  these authors in this study used N3 and N4. So sleep architecture getting screwed up  there. So be aware of that, that using caffeine can increase light sleep, decrease your  deep sleep.  [0:28:13]  09/01/25   Page   of 8   12

SSC 2.0 - 506: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 2  This 2023 study was looking at the effects of caffeine on the sleep and the author state re -  ductions in total sleep time are dependent on the final dose of caffeine, time of day that it  was consumed relative to bedtime. Greater reductions in your total sleep time occurring  when larger doses are consumed close to bedtime. Okay, that makes sense. So then they  say to avoid reductions in total sleep time, coffee, 107 milligrams per 250 mils, should be  consumed at least 8.8 hours prior to bedtime and a standard serve of pre-workout sup -  plement, note the massive more caffeine here, 217 milligrams, should be consumed at  least 13.2 hours before bedtime. This gets into another issue here now.  [0:29:02]  Remember, this is a study and not only a study but a meta-analysis. So here they took lots  of different studies and kind of combined this stuff. So it's possible that there's no one that  needs to stop drinking 8.8 hours prior to bedtime. It needs to have their coffee 8.8 hours  before bedtime. Remember, that's an average taken from multiple studies. So what that  really should mean is there are some people that are like Jenny and she needs to be a  good 8, 9, 10 hours before bedtime. So I guess she would be more on that average of the  bell curve that they're talking about here because that's about her is 8.8 hours. All right.  She doesn't usually, she tries to go to bed about 11 o'clock and she would typically never  drink caffeine after 2:00 PM. So that's, you know, nine hours.  [0:29:56]  Now, another concern here though, so with the pre-workout stuff, that's being messed up  by a lot of people, right? A lot of people do their workouts later in the day or after work or,  so living in Puerto Rico now, I'm still trying to figure out the island time there and how that  works. But I'll usually go to the gym like 9:00 or 10:00 in the morning and stuff. And there's  a lot of people there at 9:00 or 10:00. I would think that they would be at work and stuff,  but they're not. And I've gone to the gym at noon and there's still a lot of people there and  stuff like that. And you will definitely see people sipping on their bottles, could be water, but  I know a lot of people do take these pre-workout supplements and they are probably doing  it before, you know, they're doing it less than 13 hours before they plan to go to bed.  [0:30:50]  But let's say that your model is that you're gonna use a pre-workout supplement, but you  go to the gym first thing in the morning. So, you know, 6, 7 o'clock in the morning, you're  going to take your pre-workout blast. And then you're like, "Cool, I got it. You know, here,  this study says 13 hours before I go to bed. That's good. So no problem. I got this." Okay,  here's another bit of a bummer is this is where people get dependent on that neuro-stimu -  lating boost when they get up.  [0:31:28]  So rather than the neurostimulation coming from light to their retinas and that it's daytime  and just that normal circadian rhythm, it's they get up and then they take a blast of caffeine  to make their brain like, "Oh my gosh, what's going on here?" If that is something you do  on a regular basis, you're going to not feel as good if you don't do that. So the morning cof -  fee, like, you know, don't talk to me till I have my morning coffee. That is part of that de -  pendency on you have trained your brain that it needs this hit of stimulant in order to be  09/01/25   Page   of 9   12

SSC 2.0 - 506: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 2  normal. It's not to be... Again, people don't say, "Hey, I need my coffee to feel euphoric or  to enhance my mood," or stuff like that. They need it to feel normal. That's the problem  with a lot of these drugs is you get a tolerance built up to where the dose that used to  make you feel euphoric, used to enhance your mood, stuff like that, doesn't anymore. So  you kind of keep jacking it up to where you get that euphoria or whatever. And then to feel  normal, you have to have a certain level of caffeine on board or you just don't feel normal.  Caffeine & Sleep Graphic   [0:32:48]  So this is a graphic from that same study. And this is not a great graphic for me 'cause I'm  a little red green colorblind here. So I'm sure Jazzy will have to put things on here. [laugh -  ter] But from the way I see color here, So what we're looking at here is 100 milligrams of  caffeine, which isn't that much. Over here it says 100 milligram dose of caffeine can be  consumed up to four hours prior to bedtime without significant effect. So here it's got 12  hours, eight hours, four hours, and then these different shades here are down here to this  legend. So a real bright green there is a large positive effect. And again, my eyes are not  seeing anything that looks like that bright green. There are some little minor shade of  green that we do see a little bit there. So it's possible that in this meta-analysis anyway,  that some caffeine intake not only didn't have a negative effect, but even seemed to skew  slightly positive for certain things. And you see a little bit more of that in the four hours or  up to four hours with this here. So we see a little bit though, again, in my colorblind eyes  here, I'm seeing some pink, right? So I'm seeing some pink showing up here and pink is  negative effect. And there have been, this is a meta-analysis, relatively recent in 23, but  there's been studies, many studies over the years that have shown that any caffeine intake  can affect subsequent sleep, any at all.  [0:34:28]  Now again, they kind of live in the real world, these researchers though, and say, "Hey,  people are probably going to take caffeine. It's the most popular drug in the whole world.  So the less you can take closer to bed, then the less impact you'll have." Now, note that  this is a hundred milligrams up top, and then we have 400 milligrams down here. And if  you're taking that anywhere in that four hour range, then you got some massively bad ef -  fects. Okay. All the ones with the asterisks in there were statistically significant. And again,  that just kind of makes sense. But even 12 hours, notice a lot of pink there. Okay. Again, a  little colorblind here, and maybe Jazzy can point that out. Maybe that one right there, but  you're not seeing a heck of a lot of green down in here or up here either. We're not seeing  a lot of this. We don't see any bright green at all, but we get to see some nice dark red in  there. So large negative effect on these different things. So kind of go through that. This  might be another graphic that you might print out or go get this study to share with your  patients and just make them aware of it, right? 'Cause if you have people that are taking in  a lot of caffeine and 400 milligrams, not that hard, not that hard to take in 400 milligrams.  09/01/25   Page   of 10   12

SSC 2.0 - 506: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 2  [0:35:51]  And if they're doing that 12 hours before they go to bed, there's still going to be some neg -  ative effects here. So you see here the N1 and N2 was statistically significant for a large  negative effect 12 hours, 12 hours before bedtime. Here's another graphic from that same  study. Kind of nice and kind of go through this, but their conclusion 100 milligrams up to  four hours prior to bedtime, no significant effect, 400 milligrams within 12 hours of bedtime  significantly reduced sleep quantity and quality. So it's a dose response curve here. And of  course you would expect that there would be individual variability with that. You notice in  this graphic, this was 100 milligrams, 400 milligrams and compared to placebo, placebo  didn't have an effect on anybody at all. And you can see that the different areas here that it  had an impact. So bottom line, more caffeine at all going to have an effect, lesser caffeine,  the more distance from bedtime, the better.  Drugs with Adverse Effects with Caffeine Consumption   [0:36:58]  And guess what? The effect of caffeine with other medications can be cumulative and  cause additional problems. So here's some of the drugs and medications that caffeine can  increase the side effects of those drugs and the caffeine itself. Do you have some patients  that are on these medications that might also take in pretty good quantities of caffeine?  Yeah, I bet you do. So this is again, when we're living in the real world here, it's not just  about the caffeine even. It's about, "Hey, do you drink any caffeine at all?" "Yeah, I do Cel -  sius every day." "Okay, when?" "Okay, then that would be this."  [0:37:39]  And then, it's like, "All right, and the other medications you're on?" "Oh yeah, I'm on a  heart medication. I'm on Warfarin. I'm on Adderall." So that's a fun one, right? So you'll  have, you'll skews younger, but now a lot of college-age kids too, and even adults are,  well, I guess college-age kids are adults too, aren't they? But a lot of people on Adderall,  which is a stimulant, and then they caffeine too. So these are folks that the caffeine not do -  ing it for them. So they are now on stimulants. So it's all this combination type of effects.  [0:38:18]  And if you think about that for even just a minute or two, why would you think that your oral  appliance therapy is going to make that person feel awesome if they're so dependent on  all of these stimulants? Yeah, their sleep apnea can be affecting their sleep. And yes, they  may feel better, but there's something else going on too, if they have to be on a ton of  stimulants every day to feel normal. Okay, so the picking this stuff up in advance of treat -  ment is helpful. If you were to ask questions like this, then if I were you, I might say some -  thing like, "Hey, if you are finding that you have to take 300, 400 milligrams of caffeine a  day to kind of maintain normalcy and to feel awake and stuff like that, I'm not sure that this  09/01/25   Page   of 11   12

SSC 2.0 - 506: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 2  oral appliance is going to make it all of a sudden where you don't ever drink caffeine  again.”  [0:39:17]  “But if you aren't really seeing that big difference in how you feel during the day, we're  gonna want to work with your medical doctor 'cause there could be some other stuff going  on here. And I see that it's not just the caffeine that you're intaking, but it's also that you're  on these four other medications. And I don't got any studies and stuff on that. I don't know.  So we need to treat you as an individual and there's other things other than just your air -  way collapsing while you sleep that could be affecting this."  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 12   12

