SSC 2.0 - 409: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 3  SSC 2.0   Level 4  409: Practical Principles of Pro fi tability for  Sleep & TMD Part 3  [intro music]  Long-term Follow Up   -   Dental Sleep Medicine   [0:00:12]  What about with long-term follow-up? For dental sleep and TMD, these are patients that  we tend to treat for their lifetime. And with dental sleep medicine first, we strongly encour -  age you, and so does the Academy of Dental Sleep Medicine, to see your patients annual -  ly for follow-up. And ideally in person so that you can check the bite. However, if you're in  person, if you remember this in level three, talking about this and with their morning repro -  grammer and whatnot, let me give you this pearl again, in case you missed it the first time.  You can do things via telemedicine that will be pretty darn good. So for example, Spencer  Study Club member, Nancy Addy, gave an idea to all of us a year or so ago, where she  uses those little flags, so post-it flags, I believe they're called.  [0:01:05]  And they look like shim stock, except it's paper. And they're inexpensive. And she'll give  these to her patients when she gives them the oral appliance. And she'll show them how to  use it just like shim stock. They put the paper between their back teeth and see if they hold  it or it rips. And hold it, rips. Then they know that their teeth are together. You can use that  on a telemedicine visit. So if the patient can't come in at that annual, you could see them  on the computer, say, "Hey, tap your teeth together for me. You know, you've got their  models up on your screen or something, you're looking, checking that there's nothing  weird with their midline, that their overbite overjet seems the same as it was before. And  then you could say,  [0:01:48]  "Hey, you've got that little flag post-it note there." Your staff could tell them to have a few  things ready to do this with. I mean, frankly, if they didn't have that, they could rip a piece  of paper, they could make their own flag, right? But have them do some shim stock for the  home, hold it, hold it, all right, you're pretty comfortable that things are okay. You'd rather  see them in person though. But my point there is we just want to have that contact every  year. As I mentioned before, we have someone in our team that that's their entire job is to  have these annual contacts and make sure that we are constantly in connection with our  patients at least annually.  [0:02:25]  09 /01/25   Page   of 1   12

SSC 2.0 - 409: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 3  Now, next here, bullet point is that person's job is also to figure out if that patient is eligible  for a new appliance. Couple things on that, and this is kind of more for my US-based  friends and colleagues here. Most insurance companies will pay for a new appliance every  three to five years, but some insurance companies will pay for an appliance more frequent -  ly than that. Also, sometimes patients change insurance companies. So if your patient  goes from Blue Cross to Cigna, it's a new ballgame for Cigna. So Cigna will pay for a new  appliance based on the same criteria that Blue Cross would have, but they don't take into  account that they just got an appliance last year from Blue Cross.  [0:03:09]  So knowing that stuff and kind of knowing the rules and how that works could be really  beneficial because most of the time when you ask the patient, hey, we've looked into this  for you and you're out of pocket's going to be, you know, 400 bucks for a brand new appli -  ance, your current appliance, you're doing great with it. You're taking good care of it. But  maybe you would like another one to have for when you travel or if you have a vacation  place that you go to or things like that, it'd be nice to have a spare, that's for sure. And the  vast majority of patients are like, "Oh my gosh, absolutely. I would love that because I only  have this one and I have a lot of anxiety about leaving that at a hotel room one day or  something like that." This is kind of up to you. You're not going to have your patients come  to you and say, "Hey, it's been like three years. I'm pretty sure Blue Cross covers this  every three years, right?" So that's your team's job. And as the patient comes in to present  them with, "Hey, you can get another one of these." They're going to think that's pretty  awesome. Some patients will get a second appliance regardless of insurance. So you  should offer that. As a matter of fact, the best time to offer that is early on in treatment.  [0:04:21]  Some people do it like right at the beginning, but most people can't make really an intelli -  gent choice at that point. It'd be kind of like, you know, if you were trying out a new pillow,  let's say, and let's say it was kind of expensive, but they had a deal where it was like you  could get a second one for 50% off. You might not take that deal because you're like, well,  I don't know if I'm going to like it or not. So I don't want two of these things that I don't real -  ly like. One, I just start with the one, and then if I really like it, then I'll get another one. I  get, you know, I would be saving money by buying more, but not if I don't like it. Same  thing here. So we like to do this when the patient comes in for their first or second follow-  up. If they come in and they are raving fans, they're like, oh my gosh, this has changed my  life. My wife is over the moon, excited that she's getting a good night's sleep now, finally.  Everything's wonderful. And you're like, hey,  [0:05:21]  You're doing great. You're taking care of the appliance. Awesome. Something that a lot of  our patients like to think about is kind of a spare. If they wear glasses, you say, curious, do  you have more than one pair of glasses? And of course they say, well, yes, of course I do.  I don't think anybody has one pair of glasses. Well, it's kind of like that. So you might con -  sider, no pressure, you can do this if you want to, but you might consider having a spare  appliance. We'd make exactly the same appliance that you have now, make another one  09 /01/25   Page   of 2   12

SSC 2.0 - 409: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 3  of those so that you have a backup, so that you have one that maybe you can keep in your  overnight bag for when you travel. Heaven forbid you go someplace, you forget your ap -  pliance at home, now you get a crappy night's sleep for a day or two, you're off on a busi -  ness trip or something, that may be something you want to consider.  [0:06:07]  Your insurance will have nothing to do with that, of course, because that's not how they  think. So what we do though on that is we have a cash fee that we feel is affordable. That's  going to be X. And then you can have that. Your insurance, they set the rate that we have  here at $4,200. Remember that insurance pricing thing? That would be your fee. And you  can actually say, yeah, that's kind of set because we're in network with your insurance.  The fee is $4,200. However, if you'd like to get a second appliance at this time, it's $1,800.  And you'll have a lot of patients like, yeah, let's do that. Let's get going on that.  TMD   [0:06:43]  Okay, what about TMD? So TMD, night guards replaced every three to five years. And  same type of thing. Most people that if they really are wearing their night guard, they get a  little bit concerned about it wearing out or about them losing it or whatever. So that is an  option.  Phase II Treatments   [0:07:02]  Phase two treatments sometimes will come up, although as you know, I'm not a huge ad -  vocate for doing phase two, but there will be some people that this is appropriate and  maybe they want to do some orthodontics, maybe they want to do something else and you  can be part of that team. And then most importantly, frankly, with TMD and why I have that  bolded and capped here, PRF. Patients that you have seen in the past who maybe you  just did a night guard, but now you know about this and I would strongly encourage you to  as you get these skills and if you already have these skills to reach out to those patients  you probably have in your records a record of everyone you ever gave a night guard to  and it probably wouldn't be that hard to send a mailing or an email or both and to those pa -  tients who have received a night guard and let them know some stuff.  [0:07:59]  Hey, I've got some extra training in this. I'm training with the best group in the world on  this. My mentors and I have treated tens of thousands of people and we found a couple  things over the years. There's actually research on this over the past 30 years. Some peo -  ple will clench and grind their teeth to try to protect their airway. Do you snore? Has any -  one ever told you to stop breathing when you sleep? If you answered yes to either of those  09 /01/25   Page   of 3   12

SSC 2.0 - 409: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 3  questions, there may be other things going on. I'd love to talk to you because it's possible  that your night guard is protecting your teeth, but it's not protecting your airway.  [0:08:32]  Also, if it seems to be helping you, but you continue to suffer at any level at all with some  chronic TMJ pain. You get occasional joint pain, muscle pain, headaches, things like that.  The mechanical treatment that we've given you in the past can be very, very helpful and  we highly recommend that you continue using it. However, now there are regenerative  medicine techniques that we're using to help actually reverse some of these problems. if  you believe that you may have arthritic changes in your jaw joints, if you have chronic  muscle pain, or if even you have episodic problems that seem to keep coming back, kind  of these nagging aches and pains in the head and neck area, please reach out. These re -  generative medicine techniques, using your own blood to maximize the healing process,  this could be something that works for you. Please reach out. Okay, I would strongly en -  courage you to do that.  Consider Your Capacity   [0:09:29]  Now, as you are building your sleep and TMD practice and building this into your practice,  one of the biggest things you need to consider, your capacity. You probably don't have ca -  pacity like this, right? None of us do. Your capacity probably more feels like this. And often -  times, this is where dentists fall down is they've got these desires and appropriate passion  to help a bunch of people and you want to get them in and you want to do all this stuff and  you also have 20, 30, 40 new dental patients a month that you're taking care of and all of a  sudden you are at capacity. And when that happens, it's not good because people all of a  sudden can't get in. That emergency patient that may be a patient of record, but they  broke their tooth and they need to get in because they're going on a trip. And it's like, oh  my gosh, we have nowhere in the schedule for you.  [0:10:30]  So then as a good person, you fit them into the schedule and you want to take care of  them. And now your staff have to stay late and help you take care of this patient. And when  this happens, not just once in a blue moon, but now on a regular basis, your staff start to  get a little bit burned out. People can't get in. You start getting some referrals from doctors.  You're really excited. You've got doctors in your community that are referring you patients  for sleep apnea but the patient can't get in for two months because you're booked out so  much. So really, really take into consideration your capacity. As a matter of fact, your ability  to see people, your capacity in your practice is the number one thing you need to think  about when you're making decisions. For example, will I work with medical insurance or  will I not?  [0:11:21]  09 /01/25   Page   of 4   12

SSC 2.0 - 409: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 3  If you have tons of capacity, yeah, I think you should work with medical insurance. It's go -  ing to allow more people to say yes. It's going to allow more people to refer to you. It's go -  ing to allow, you know, your capacity will allow you to see all those people. If right now you  can't get a new patient in, if you've only got three operatories, you don't really have the  ability to have this assistant-driven practice like I've talked about, I for sure would not work  with medical insurance because I don't want the volume. I would make it more of a bou -  tique where I personally do everything with the patient and I would charge accordingly.  That would be based on capacity. And you could say, well, my capacity now is very mini -  mal, but I have ambitions to get into this bigger space. Great. There's nothing that says  you can't have one type of practice now and then build into another practice.  [0:12:16]  As a matter of fact, as long as you're honest with your referring doctors and stuff like that,  they'll be fine with that. You could literally say, "Hey, doc, I'm not in network with insurance  right now because I only got a couple of operatories. I just have no room. I have no space.  I really can't handle that many patients." And so when you're thinking to refer people to  me, feel free to tell them, "I don't work with medical insurance." That it is all out of pocket,  but that we do a great job and I'm going to see your patient personally.  [0:12:43]  However, in the next couple of years, I'm looking to expand to get a different location, have  much more space, be able to have kind of mid-level providers like you have, doctor, help  me out, make it more affordable for patients and get in network with insurance. And the  doctor would be like, yeah, that all makes sense. Okay. They understand capacity issues.  A lot of dentists kind of don't. So they, again, they go hear these courses and they want to  have this type of practice, and then it's literally not possible for them. I remember, quick  story on that, I had a business elite member and on our first meeting, we were kind of talk -  ing about what kind of practices they wanted to build. And we'll talk about this next here.  [0:13:25]  And he's like, well, I want to practice just like yours, Jamison. I want to do exactly what  you're doing. And I was like, oh, all right. Well, tell me about your current facility and what -  not. He's like, well, I'm in Southern California and I'm in 1,200 square feet. We have three  operatories. And I was like, okay. And are you going to move or what's your plan? No, I  kind of like my small space there. And I think that's where we're going to stay. And I'm like,  okay, well, there's no way you can have a practice like mine. It's like we have eight opera -  tories. I have four assistants that do nothing but fitting some follow-up. I have an assistant  that just works with the doctor and goes with the doctor for new patients. You don't have  the capacity to do what we do. And I could tell he was actually kind of disappointed when I  said that. He hadn't thought that through. And now fast forward several years and now he's  in a bigger space.  [0:14:22]  And he does want to be able to see more people, but he actually, in the meantime, created  a really nice boutique type of practice. And he's using those skills of that boutique nature  and then bringing in only certain insurance companies that will allow him to control the  09 /01/25   Page   of 5   12

SSC 2.0 - 409: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 3  number of patients he has coming into the capacity at the level that he wants. That is  smart.  Consider Your Goals   [0:14:51]  Okay, think about your capacity. Now, speaking of that story of my friend in Business Elite,  let's talk about your goals a little bit. It's really important to decide what you want in ad -  vance and then go after it. So what are your goals with Dental Sleep and TMD in your  practice? Get really clear on that. As I've mentioned before, build the blueprint, build it, and  then you can go and you've got the plans. If you just haphazardly start building with no  plan, it rarely, rarely, rarely works out. So consider your goals, consider your outcome. This  is where I'm trying to get.  Consider Your Outcome and Your Why?   [0:15:40]  Consider your why. And your why is what's going to actually make you successful in this.  Everyone in this field of sleep and TMD that I know who is successful has a really strong  why. And oftentimes those whys are personal in nature. You've heard me talk about my  son having sleep apnea. You've heard me talk about my father falling asleep at the wheel  and rolling his car. You've heard me say that Jenny wears an oral appliance. I've worn an  oral appliance.  [0:16:15]  It's a family affair. I've got grandkids now that have had tongue tie release and I've given  them the little mild munchy things to try to help with growth and development. We talk  about our nutrition all the time. We're super into fitness and exercise. My why is expanding  this knowledge and what we've been able to do in our practices to you and to dentists all  over the world. That's why I do what I do and why I'm really excited about it. Your why, and  probably since you've got connected with me because I tend to, I have a gift of attracting  good people. Probably your why of joining Spencer Study Club is that you want to help  people. That appeals to you. You like that idea.  [0:17:07]  And there could be some other whys. Some other whys could be that you have pain from  being a restorative dentist and you like the idea of not having to be in that posture that  causes your pain. Another why could be that you like the idea of the financial or potential  financial rewards of adding sleep and TMD to your practice. Now that last one, if it's all  about money, then that probably won't be strong enough for you because you'll always be  looking for the next thing. Like, well, what could make me more money? And you'll kind of  leave that. You see that with like serial entrepreneurs where it's just about the kind of the  chase and the hunt. And then after they've got their thing, then they just move on to the  09 /01/25   Page   of 6   12

SSC 2.0 - 409: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 3  next thing. That doesn't tend to be the people I attract though. So I attract people that are  about helping people.  [0:18:01]  They're about doing the right thing. And then, frankly, almost lastly, they're about, yeah,  and this could be profitable for me as well as physically profitable for me, as in not hurting  anymore. What is your why? Get very clear on your why and you might need to remind  yourself of this why all the time because as you butt up your head, you butt your head  against insurance company rules and as you have patients that complain because they  will, as you have staff members leave because they will, you really need to have a strong  why get crystal clear on that, put it on a post-it note someplace to remind yourself because  there will be parts of this journey that are pretty hard.  Take A Massive Action   [0:18:46]  Once you're clear on your why, then you want to take massive action. And when I say  massive action, I mean massive action. Now this is part of this, whether you've been a  member of Spencer Study Club very briefly and this Spencer Study Club 2.0 is your first  exposure to all of this stuff, or maybe you've been a member of Spencer Study Club for  years,  [0:19:08]  Have you taken massive action? Have you done that? I know so many people in our field  and many Special Study Club members who don't. And they just kind of play around with it  and they do a case here and there, but they really haven't hit it. And then when they do,  they tend to take off. A couple quick stories on that. One is someone who has a extremely  busy and successful restorative practice as a individual dentist. She runs this practice in its  amazing, does well over $2 million by herself, bread and butter practice, not super high  end or anything, just kind of bread and butter. And is again, individual dentist doing this  huge revenue. And she's just a workhorse. She just works like crazy. And she has a lot of  friends in the medical community. And so she started the dental sleep part of a practice in  a different spot. She found this building and was like, okay, well, I'll do Fridays there.  [0:20:07]  And this took forever. She had medical doctors in her community that were friends of hers  that were always like, hey, when are you going to do this? I need to send my patients to  you. And she'd be like, well, you know, I'll get to it eventually. And yeah, you know, I'm try -  ing to and whatever. And this went on for years that she was kind of slow playing getting  this started.  [0:20:29]  And now then fast forward to today and that little one day a week dental sleep medicine  practice is on track to do like over a million dollars this year. Just like one day. Unbeliev -  able. So now she's having kind of the capacity issues of like, well, how do I have this two  09 /01/25   Page   of 7   12

SSC 2.0 - 409: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 3  million plus restorative practice and this little million dollar side hustle that I've created?  How do I make all that stuff work? And she's figuring that out.  [0:20:56]  Another person was doing really well in the field and really educated, wanted to learn more  about TMD. And this is kind of a funny story that someone she was working with reached  out to me and said, "Hey, you know, this person is looking at this residency here at this  university and this program at this university, and these things were tens of thousands of  dollars and many weekends or weeks and all this stuff." And I said, "Well, with all due re -  spect, What she would learn in the modules of Spencer Study Club is going to give her  much more than what those residencies are going to do, which I can speak from personal  experience because I did a master's degree. And I said, you know, she has access to all  those videos. She should probably start there. And the person who was working with her  was like, yeah, you know, that makes sense. And then a couple of weeks later, I had this  dentist who had been a member of Spencer Study Club for several years.  [0:21:57]  Reach out to me and say, "I don't know why, but I don't know why I put this off for so long,  but your videos are amazing. I've been able to learn all of this stuff about TMD and finally  feel comfortable." And she already had it. She'd already bought it and just had it. So she  had taken some action, but I wouldn't call it massive action. A lot of times dentists think  that taking massive action is that they swipe their credit card for some course that they  then never open or they go to some program, but then they never implement it. So for you,  massive action means implementation. It's not just learning. Learning is important, but  knowledge is not power. Implementation is where the actual power comes in.  Measure Your Results!   [0:22:49]  So you know your target, you've got your why, you've taken massive action. Next step is  measuring your results. And this is critically important. I'm sure you know this in your prac -  tice. However, as I have coached a lot of people in dental sleep medicine and TMD, I find  that we're really always able to look at a few things and figure out where the problem is.  And that takes some measuring. So for example, a couple of those things that you'll want  to measure are how many people are being screened.  [0:23:23]  How many people are accepting that referral to the sleep doctor or primary care doctor  that you're gonna work with? How many of those people are actually going? How many of  those people are being diagnosed with sleep apnea and being returned for oral appliance  therapy? When someone is referred to your office for oral appliance therapy, what's the  number that are referred versus who actually come in? That one right there, so you may  be kind of an expert in dental sleep medicine or have been doing this for a while and  09 /01/25   Page   of 8   12

SSC 2.0 - 409: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 3  you're seeing a reasonable number of patients. Maybe you have a practice limited to den -  tal sleep medicine. All bet you anything that you get more referrals than you think you do.  [0:24:04]  This is a common area in our business elite group that we see where dentists actually  have more than enough referrals. They're just not converting those referrals into patients  that are actually coming into the office. There's something happening at the front desk of -  ten where the patient, maybe they call up and the patient's like, yeah, you know, are you in  network with Blue Cross? And the front desk is like, no, we're not. And like, okay, click,  goodbye.  [0:24:29]  Whereas maybe if they would have just stayed on a little bit, they would have found out  that that wasn't that big a deal. Or maybe they ask just right straight up, well, how much is  oral appliance therapy cost? And the person, instead of asking all the questions that would  figure out that for this person, who's going to be very little out of pocket, might say, well, it's  $4,200. And the patient says, okay, goodbye. So a lot of stuff can happen there. But in my  experience, people that have  [0:24:55]  Referral-based practices tend to be getting more referrals than they even know. As an ex -  ample, and this will sound like an overwhelming number, but in our practice in 2024, we  realized that there were literally hundreds of people that were referred to our practice that  we were never able to get a hold of. We're never able to contact them. And that took some  digging because again, that's not something that they would necessarily track is just these  number of referrals. So we had to go into detail and figure that out of where were these  patients, why were they not getting in? You have to measure. Once you've got patients in  treatment, then you're measuring things like your outcomes and how the patients are do -  ing. Reduction in HI TMJ problems getting better, you are measuring via maybe a pre and  post cone beam CT for people that you're doing PRF on, you need objective measures to  know that you're on the right track.  Change Your Approach   [0:25:53]  As I just mentioned, in measuring our results for those patients that were referred but we  didn't contact them or we weren't able to contact them, we then changed our approach.  We had been doing it one way, then we changed and there's multiple ways now that we try  to contact our patients. This is how you make progress is you measure those results, de -  termine that objective measure, and then you're like, hey, could we do things a little differ -  ent? For example, another thing you might be measuring these patients coming back for  their follow-ups and you're doing them every two weeks, but you start looking at it and  you're like, you know,  [0:26:28]  09 /01/25   Page   of 9   12

SSC 2.0 - 409: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 3  60-70% of the patients, they don't need anything. We don't adjust their appliance. They're  doing well. There's no comfort issues. Well, maybe we could move that from two weeks to  three weeks. We could change our approach a little bit. Maybe we could offer a telemedi -  cine visit and see how many people actually need to come in in person. We could change  our approach there too. That would help us out. And changing your approach...  [0:26:54]  It doesn't mean that you are abandoning the other direction, but you are going down a dif -  ferent road for a bit, learning what that does, and then you can always change course. As  a matter of fact, what our big goal here is, is that this is a round and it's really the science  of success and progress is built like this. You know your target, you know your goal. This is  what I want. We are very clear on our why. Why do I actually want this? Once we have  that, we take massive action, right? When we take our action, we are then measuring our  results from that action, which then may result in us changing our approach.  [0:27:40]  And then we take action, measure results, and we just keep in this round. And by the way,  we may continue on our path. If we're measuring and things are going awesome, then of  course you're not going to change your approach. You're gonna just keep going. You're  gonna continue that massive action. And this will then change over time. What is right for  you today at the level of your practice, whatever you're doing, if you're just a complete be -  ginner or you're doing millions of dollars a year, That is right for now. And then as you grow  or as you change directions, this will work. This works every time for every goal that you  have. If your goal is weight loss or something like that, you get a goal, you figure out your  why that you actually want that, you take massive action, you measure your results on a  consistent basis, and then you might change direction. I've done this over and over and  over again in my life with clients.  [0:28:33]  Different things from athletics to nutrition to schooling like you have to all sorts of stuff. This  really is the science of success and Speaking of doing this with others We have our busi -  ness elite group and I would encourage you to look at that if you think that you need some  more personalized help and everything that I've taught you in this section, if you just kind  of do this on your own, you're going to massively improve your practice and the profitability  in your practice. You just are. I've seen this over and over and over again. If you put in the  work, you're going to get the results. It's guaranteed that you will have those results.  [0:29:09]  However, if you then want more specific just for you, and we do this in a group, and actual -  ly, even though it's a group, it's really valuable with that personalized approach because  the people in the group have probably been where you are now. Unless you're doing more  than $5 million by yourself in your sleep and TMD practice, one of our members has been  where you are now because they were wherever you are from total startup beginner. And  we have people in our business lead group that are literally not even had a startup yet.  They just wanted to get the foundation really solid before they started to build. Very, very  09 /01/25   Page   of 10   12

SSC 2.0 - 409: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 3  smart of them. Other people have come in, they've got their things going on. And some -  times we have to deconstruct some stuff in order to build back  [0:30:02]  But I encourage you to look at this. It could be massively helpful for you. But definitely dig  in here first with these things that you've already paid for. Take your massive action, start  measuring your results, and then you can decide if it would make sense to have a coach  or not. In the things that I've pursued in my life, frankly, the fastest way to get what you  want is to find someone who already has what you want and then copy what they did. I've  done that with running to qualify for the Boston Marathon. I've done that with some other  fitness goals that I have. I've done that with financial things. I've done that even with  Spencer Study Club. When I originally built Spencer Study Club, I found people who had  already done what I wanted to do, not in our space. There was no one in our space that  had done this, but there were people that had done it in different industries. I found what  they did and basically copied it. and modified it to what I wanted to do. That's available for  you as well.  Business Lead Alumni Group   [0:31:00]  And let me share something that I’m quite proud of with our business lead alumni group.  So these are dentists, our business lead essentials is the kind of beginner first level that  teaches all of the business basics of running a successful dental sleep and TMD practice  or having that as part of your practice. Most of our business lead members are general  dentists who do sleep and TMD as part of their restorative practice. However, we do also  have a quite a collection of specialists, limited people that only do sleep in TMD. I believe  that I have the highest collection of boarded or a facial pain specialists, uh, probably any -  one.  [0:31:41]  In the world that are part of our Business Elite alumni group and they're doing amazing.  But what you're seeing here is when we started this group back in 2018, so the 2018, their  numbers were here, the blue being what they were doing in sleep, the tiny, you can barely  see it, red is TMD and then the golden bar there is for their general practice. And this is  when we started, so that's where they kind of came in. And collectively, we're talking about  roughly 30 people in that group, and they were doing collectively very little. So that blue  bar represents like maybe a million dollars, million and a half dollars amongst all these  people. I think the biggest practice of the bunch was under a million dollars, well under a  million dollars actually.  [0:32:33]  Then as we go through the years here, you start to see this grow. 2019 would have been  their move from here to here. 2020, '21, massive change. '22, '23, '24. Collectively, this  group, most of whom have been with us in our business lead alumni group now for over  09 /01/25   Page   of 11   12

SSC 2.0 - 409: Practical Principles of Profitability for Sleep & TMD Part 3  five years, but collectively, that group did nearly $25 million as a group. Individuals within  that group. There's one in particular that took her practice from half a million dollars to over  $5 million in that time just by herself.  [0:33:11]  There's others that have had also massive growth. And you also see the change in TMD  going from basically nothing to quite a bit, $5 million from negligible when they started.  And the other thing that I'm happy about is that their general practices did not suffer. They  have grown their general practices as well. And why that is, is because the business prin -  ciples that you just learned in this profitability session,  [0:33:38]  Apply to every business. If you had a sandwich shop, they would apply to the sandwich  shop business. Business is business. And these dentists are applying what we're teaching.  Now, I'm an expert on sleep and TMD. That is my practice. That's what we do. So I apply  that to them. But then those same things spill over to their restorative practice, to other  businesses that they may own, things like that. So this is something you might consider.  But again, in the meantime, just jump in, figure out your goal, figure out your why, take  massive action, measure your results, change course as needed, and just continue that  cycle. And I guarantee your success. It's a science. The results will happen as long as you  put in the work. Okay, take care.  [outro music]  09 /01/25   Page   of 12   12

