SSC 2.0 - 317: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 1  SSC 2.0   Level 3  317: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc  Part 1  [intro music]  Unlocking the Non-Reducing Disc   [0:00:12]  Hello, and welcome to Unlocking the Non-Reducing Disc. This is perhaps one of the most  important lectures you're going to watch. And here's why I say that. It's because so few  dentists know how to do what you're about to learn to do. If you've been a member of  Spencer Study Club for years, and maybe you watched the original Unlocking the Non-  Reducing Disc, but you aren't doing it yet, then watch this again. The information is not  gonna be new. There will be a couple studies I throw in there, that are a little bit more re -  cent. And actually, some of it will even make my case of why you have to be the one to do  this instead of somebody else. Instead of maybe the oral surgeons in your area. It really is  up to you. And if you learn this skill and get confident in it, which is important, you're gonna  help so many people not progress to those worse levels of degeneration. In order to get to  degenerative joint disease, you have to pass through non-reducing disc displacement. It'd  be super rare. I'm not even sure it'd be possible for someone to go from reducing disc dis -  placement even, straight to degenerative arthritis.  [0:01:49]  They're gonna pass through non-reducing disc displacement along that way. Because  when they've got a disc, when they've got that soft tissue between the condyle and the ar -  ticular eminence, there doesn't tend to be that breakdown. I implore you, to not just learn  about this, but to actually implement it. That's what it's all about. Why are you part of this  group if it's just about gaining information? Is that it? I guess that's okay, but only if you  take the information you gain, and then refer people to people like my practice and other  people in Spencer Study Club who will actually do it. Just having the knowledge gives you  no power. The power is when you implement. And if you've been scared to do that, just  jump in. Here's the thing. If you don't help them, no one else is going to either. And as I'll  talk about in a moment, the clock is ticking when someone has a non-reducing disc dis -  placement. Time is of the essence. And for you to try, won't hurt anyone. For you to not try,  you've pretty much sealed their fate.  [0:03:11]  Okay, let's jump in with that little pep talk here at the beginning. I hope it is a pep talk, be -  cause I really feel strongly, as you can tell, that I want you to actually do this. I want you to  do this. And you know what? You can. I've taught hundreds and hundreds, if not thousands  09/01/25   Page   of 1   19

SSC 2.0 - 317: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 1  of dentists at this point, how to do this very thing. And they're successful all over the world  in doing it exactly how I'm about to show you. And our practices do this almost daily. And  now, the advantage of SSC 2.0, if you're joining us now, it's the best time ever, because  we're gonna give you some techniques to make it even better.  TMJ Injection Technique (Review)   [0:03:56]  Okay, cool. So some review of our TMJ injection technique. And there's the whole module  on injecting the jaw joint. So I'm not going to go over all of this in detail. You can go back  and watch that. Please do and learn the landmarks and learn everything that you're gonna  do to give this injection. But bottom line, we're just in front of the ear here and open. You  fall into that little space. On the TMJ injection video, I talked about superior joint space  versus inferior joint space.  [0:04:29]  In an ideal world, you would get into the inferior joint space, because typically the disc is  anteriorly displaced, obviously, but there's a little bit of an adhesion there between the  condyle and the disc. And that condyle, the space where the condyle lives is the inferior  joint space. Now, we just recently started teaching ultrasound guided injections. And so,  you can take that course, you can learn how to do that. And that's going to help you get  into that inferior joint space 'cause it's not easy. Having said that, for thousands of patients,  we have just injected blind, not with ultrasound or radiographic guidance. And we do well.  So just getting this fluid in the capsule itself is really the key. We want you in the capsule,  so that you create an hydraulic force so when that patient moves around, that fluid's gonna  move around in there and it's gonna help release any adhesions that there might be, that  are keeping that disc out of place.  Informed Consent   [0:05:38]  Get the informed consent. Go over that with the patient. That's in your document center.  Modify that to your heart's content and make sure it's legal for your state or your country  and make sure the patient knows what's going on. But with this, we need to remind them  of the temporary facial paralysis and bruising and things like that. Frankly, in the bajillions  of these that we've done in our office, I don't remember anyone getting a bruise. The pain  at the injection site is super rare. Virtually all of these things are rare. I've never had any -  one have an allergic reaction, knock on wood. I've never had anybody have an infection,  knock on wood. All those things are possible, but they're just super duper duper rare.  However, injecting the facial nerve is less rare, because if you are superficial and not actu -  ally in the capsule, then you're gonna be on top of that facial nerve.  [0:06:29]  09/01/25   Page   of 2   19

SSC 2.0 - 317: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 1  So just some reminders of that there, we want to be in the capsule, not superficial to the  capsule. For superficial capsule, we're gonna hit branch of the facial nerve. Typically the  branch or hit will go to the orbicularis oculi, so they won't be able to blink on that side. If  you're way too deep, you remember what happens if you're way too deep? You did a re -  verse Gow-Gates. So their lips gonna get numb, their jaw is gonna get numb, their  mandible is gonna get numb like you did an infraorbital nerve block or Gow-Gates. Intrao -  rally, you just learned how to do it. Extraorally in that case, our goal is in the capsule. If you  get the fluid in the capsule, there's gonna be some telltale signs that we're going to discuss  here. So we wipe off the area with the alcohol or the iodine. Again, as I talked about in the  TMJ injection section, you can go full on surgical drape and the whole enchilada if you  want to. I think that'd be cool for you to do it that way. That's great. If you're using ultra -  sound, you'll have to kind of figure all that out 'cause there's a lot of stuff going on.  [0:07:33]  But again, just do the best you can do, and do something. Get into this, get involved in this  and learn how to do this injection. And probably I would, well, actually, if you learn, if  you've never done this before, and you take our course and we teach you how to do ultra -  sound guided, then you're just gonna learn how to do that. If you already know how to do  the injection, I promise you, it's gonna be hard to do it with ultrasound guidance 'cause  you're just so used to doing it blind. But just bottom line, let's learn how to do the injection.  The cold spray is for a local anesthetic remember, it's not, it's just topical. It's not doing  anything to have some sort of therapeutic effect other than just to be cold. We're going to  inject into the capsule. We're probably gonna hit the back of the condyle. If we hit the  condyle and have the patient kind of close, notice the mouth is open and all these, have  them close their mouth a little bit. You should feel that condyle bonking against your nee -  dle. We inject the entire carpule of anesthetic. This is not a diagnostic injection. This is a  therapeutic injection. We're going to inject that entire carpule of anesthetic.  After the Injection(s)   [0:08:42]  You might get a little back pressure there at the end. That's okay. They can handle it.  There's enough room in the capsule to take that 1.7, 1.8 cc's of fluid, depending on the  size of your carpule there. Some countries, they're a little bit bigger actually too, but there's  enough room to do that. Go slow. There's no rush. You don't need to be hurrying through  this. If they have more than just like a little bit of discomfort, then you might redirect your  needle a little bit. You might have kind of landed on a nerve vessel or something going on  there, and that's why it's uncomfortable. But if you get into the capsule quickly and go nice  and slow, this does not need to be a painful injection at all. All right. So now, here's a cou -  ple of the key points to know if you're in the right spot, and then we're gonna talk about lat -  er the key point to know if you actually unlocked them or not.  09/01/25   Page   of 3   19

SSC 2.0 - 317: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 1  Did the Patient Bite Change?   [0:09:42]  So key point number one is, did their bite change? So if you injected a full carpule of anes -  thetic into the right joint capsule, what should the bite feel like? Well, off. Posterior open  bite on the side you injected into. If it's not, so if you're like, okay, does that... So what I do,  is you give the shot, and then you say, close gently for me, just close gently. Does that  make your bite feel weird at all? Okay, don't say, “that makes your bite feel off, doesn't it?”  Say, “does that make your bite feel weird at all”? And they'll hopefully say, “yes”. And you  say, how so? And go, well, it feels like I can't get my teeth together on that side. And you  go, Eureka, I am in the right spot. On the other hand, if they go, “no, no, feels good to me”  then you say in your head, dang it, in your head, missed. And then you wait a second, and  you see what happens. Because they're about to tell you, if you were superficial, by, “I  can't blink anymore, my face feels super weird”, or if you were deep, “my lips get numb”  [0:11:02]  Okay, so you will then know superficial or deep. Depending on that outcome, they will  probably be numb. So if you're superficial and you catch their facial nerve, you probably  also catch their auriculotemporal nerve, probably. Not always, but probably. If you do that,  it's gonna make them numb off the side of their head. Won't make their lip numb, but make  them numb off the side of their head, which includes the jaw joint. 75% of the fibers into  the jaw joint are from the auriculotemporal nerve. So their joint will be pretty numb. So that  means the next shot you give, won't hurt as much.  [0:11:41]  And I'll get to that in a second. If you go deep and you get their lip, then you probably also  got the auriculotemporal nerve. You just got it deeper, 'cause that wraps around the back  of the condyle. So if you went past the condyle into medially, then you probably got that.  Again, how you would know is not only will their lip be numb, but you're like, hey, up here  on the side of your head, does that feel weird at all? Oh yeah. Yeah, that's super numb  too. Okay, cool. So now you know where your needle was. So now, because I want that  hydraulic effect, I'm going back in. Now, historically, by the way, let's discuss why do we  even need the shot. It is really difficult to unlock someone without that hydraulic effect. And  I'll give you some things that you can try, but having tried lots of these things in the past,  they typically just are not as effective. However, if the day comes that there's a way to do  this without any injection at all, I will let you know. And I know there's people kind of play -  ing with that. Some people will gag people.  [0:12:48]  They'll kind of stick something in their throat without telling them. They'll take a tongue de -  pressor with their mirror and like jam it down their throat so that they like do that. And that  reflex wide opening will sometimes pop people on the disc. I like this method. It's very pre -  dictable. So that's what I teach. And again, if something comes up that's way better that  doesn't involve an injection, I'll let you know 'cause if we don't need to stick a needle in  09/01/25   Page   of 4   19

SSC 2.0 - 317: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 1  somebody, then we don't wanna stick a needle in somebody. So once we've done the first  shot, if we missed, then I'm gonna do a second shot. So the second shot, we're gonna do  more oral surgeon style. So if you ever have the opportunity to do this, I'd encourage you  to go to an oral surgeon's office and you watch them do an arthrocentesis. And what  they're gonna do, is they'll sedate the patient first. And then they're gonna put wicked big  needles into their jaw joint and they use the temporal bone as their anatomical landmark.  So they will sound against the bone.  [0:13:53]  So I call it tap tap drop. So they'll feel where that upper limit of the capsule is, and then  they'll go in with the needle and typically hit the bone and kind of redirect and hit and hit  and hit and then go in the capsule. And that gets you in the capsule. And then they'll do the  same thing in the front 'cause they'll do an input and an output or an inlet and an outlet to  flush fluid through the jaw joint. That's what you're gonna do except with just a standard 27  gauge needle again. By the way on that point, can you do this with a 30 gauge? Yeah, but  I wouldn't if I were you. So the 27 gauge gives you much better feel. It gives you the length  if you need it. And then, it's less likely that you're going to go anywhere close to the hub  with a 27 long. So I would use a 27 long if I were you. The patient's not gonna know the  difference between a 27 and a 30, just through the skin quick and then nice and slow in -  jecting slow and they're gonna be fine. So the second shot if you need to give a second  shot, I will go higher, and I will hit the bone and then I'll redirect and drop down and go into  the joint capsule just knowing gosh darn sure that I'm in the joint capsule on that second  shot. Okay. So let's say you get it on the first try and then you say, hey, does your bite feel  weird? They're like, yep, feels weird. How so? Well, yeah, it feels like I can't get my teeth  together on that side.  Ask the Patient to Move their Jaw   [0:15:23]  Okay, cool. That's great. Then we say, “hey, I want you to move your jaw side to side,” kind  of open and by the way, and I don't have this on the picture here, I should. I would have  the patient holding the alcohol on her own jaw. So I put it there, have the patient hold it  there. So now you've got the patient holding the alcohol wipe on their jaw joint, and you  got to move it around. So we're gonna feel this and if it pops, they're going to know. It's not  gonna be I wonder, it's gonna be like, "Oh my gosh" So they'll feel it. They're right there on  the jaw joint. They will feel it pop, and then they'll be able to open fully. That's what you're  going for. That is the home run if you do that. Now, I put in here while you leave the room.  So I typically will leave the room.  [0:16:20]  We’ll typically have a team member stay behind. And why that is, is 'cause the patient  could pass out. Almost has never happened in my entire career, but you just don't wanna  leave somebody alone in that situation 'cause weird stuff happens. So we have the as -  09/01/25   Page   of 5   19

SSC 2.0 - 317: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 1  sistant stay with the patient, and then the patient's holding here. They're moving their jaw  pretty aggressively opening. They're getting numb as this is going. It doesn't hurt them at  all. And a ton of people, well over 50% are gonna pop right here. You're gone. You just did  the shot correctly. You move that fluid around hydraulic effect, pop. They're gonna get back  on. Okay. Now what I just said right there, is how you know if you did it or not.  Did they Click?   [0:17:04]  Did they click? Too many times, I get asked on the Facebook group or people reaching out  to me directly 'cause they're embarrassed to put it on the Facebook group.”Hey I did this, I  did the unlocking procedure, I did blah blah blah, and they went from 26 millimeters to 35  millimeters. Did I unlock them?” And I will say, did they click?  [ 0:17:28]  Well no, like this happened just the other day, and they're like, well the patient said she  thought it was clicking but it could have also just been her ear, her station tube opening  and closing. And I'm like, well then you didn't unlock her. So it's basically not gonna hap -  pen, that you're going to go from non-reducing disc displacement, straight back to normal  without them feeling that click. It's extremely unlikely that's going to happen. Now if they're  numb, will they open bigger? Yeah, they will, but it typically won't be the three fingers. It  won't be that 48 to 52 millimeters. They'll still deflect a little bit. You've just made it so it  doesn't hurt for them to stretch out those tissues.  [0:18:20]  Okay. So don't be deceived there, that is like well you know, they open bigger and they  don't deflect as much, so maybe it worked. Probably not. You want the click. They need to  click, and if they do click at this point, then guess what happens when they put their teeth  back together? Now they've got that fluid in there, so it won't go non-reducing, it won't get  stuck quite as easily as before, but if they approximate their teeth they are likely to what?  Pop off the disc, and then they're gonna open it's gonna pop on. And you just pop pop pop  pop pop pop pop, and you're feeling it now, pop pop pop pop pop pop pop, and then you're  gonna figure out, all right, where do I need to make the temporary splint in order to keep  the disc in place.  Most Important   [0:19:08]  All right. So let me back up, this is the most important part of the of the video here. We get  the shot in the right spot, if it's not in the right spot, we get the shot in the right spot. So it  might take you a couple tries, but get the shot in the right spot. We have the patient move  their jaw around while they hold their jaw joint. More than not, more often than not, they  will pop back on then.  09/01/25   Page   of 6   19

SSC 2.0 - 317: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 1  If Not.. Gentle Manipulation Techniques   [0:19:34]  If they don't pop back on, then this is where we get involved. So the manipulation tech -  nique that I've used for years is what I call assisted opening and assisted lateral motion.  Now the classic dental school technique of sticking your thumb in on their mandibular teeth  and your fingers on their chin and pushing down, that's for an open lock. So that's for  somebody that is open wide past the articular eminence, not a closed lock. So a closed  lock, we have the disc anteriorly displaced. Now, you could still do that, but you need to be  thinking different. So on an open lock, I'm pushing down on the mandible, I'm pulling up on  the chin and I'm trying to kind of go backwards to get that condyle to go over or back to the  fossa where it's supposed to be, because it's in front of the articular eminence at this point.  So you could still do that, but this is I found to be more effective. So you can to kind of go  through this technique here.  [0:20:36]  The left TMJ, so if the left jaw joint is the one that's locked. So that is the example showing  here in the top picture here. So if her left jaw joint was locked, I would pull the jaw down  and to the right. And I want you to think about the condyle coming forward and medial, so  almost all disc displacements are anterior medial, anterior medial. Now you might have  taken a class or gone to one of the old school education centers, Pankey Institute and stuff  like that, and they're like well, is it a lateral pole, is it medial pole? What's displaced?  [0:21:22]  Okay. Almost always the lateral pole is gonna come off first, because that's the pull of the  lateral pterygoid. The lateral pterygoid is medial in comparison to the condyle, so that pull  of the muscles and the tissues is going to be anterior medial. So think about moving the  condyle anterior medial, think about moving it anterior medial. Which means my right side  we're going to translate down and we're going to move lateral, so we're gonna come me -  dial with the condyle. So lateral with the jaw to the left is gonna bring my condyle medial.  Left TMJ   [0:21:57]  All right. So left jaw joint and that's my favorite one, because I'm right-handed. So I stick  my hand in just like you saw there, and I put my knuckle up there on the maxillary teeth  and use that as a fulcrum to push with my thumb down on the bottom. Now up here, you'll  see that I've got my hand up here, and my my thumb or my, kind of the meat of my thumb  there, is gonna be on her jaw joint. So I would have that on the jaw joint, on the left side  kind of supporting things there, either my thumb like this, or the meat of my thumb or just  whatever. Just get something touching the jaw joint, and then we grab and pull to the other  09/01/25   Page   of 7   19

SSC 2.0 - 317: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 1  side. Why? So I feel it. So I'm gonna feel it pop, 'cause I'm right on top of it. Okay, that is  left side.  Right TMJ   [0:22:46]  So if it's on the right TMJ, I'm not as good at this 'cause I'm right-handed. I've tried to do it  the same way with my left hand with the knuckle and stuff and just I'm not good at that. So  you could get good at that. So you could be ambidextrous there and do it on either side.  What I've done is when it's on the right side, then I'm going to push and I'm going to try to  have my finger have something up there, that is going to be on the jaw joint while I push  over to that other side, so that I feel that click. Now you're probably gonna feel the click  just 'cause you got your hand on the jaw, but if you can, try to have something touching, so  that you can kind of push their jaw over and feel if they pop.  Either Side   [0:23:30]  Now if it's either side, so for either side, you push the jaw open. So that's what I call as -  sisted opening, is I take my thumb on an upper teeth and I point your finger on an upper  teeth and I stretch. And when I stretch, I'm going to keep, again, some body part up on  their jaw joint, 'cause I'm feeling for that too. Once again, you will typically feel it from  where you are. So if you're pushing, you usually get a little movement, a little click. If  you're here, try to pop. It's normally not like a big, gosh, I wonder. So when you do this  right, and you get them on the disc, typically you and the patient are like, that was it. There  we go. We did it. It's usually not, gosh, I wonder if this is working or not. If it is, a gosh, I  wonder if it's working or not, it probably is not. So usually, not gonna be a mystery.  If Those Techniques Don’t Work   [0:24:31]  All right, so if those techniques don't work, then some other things you can throw at them,  are the dental school technique like we talked about before, one side or the other, and  then something like a tongue blade or a couple tongue blades, a dowel, a wooden dowel.  I've used a saliva ejector here. One of our friends and Spencer Study Club members,  Dwight Romriell, has a tongue depressor that he puts a cotton roll on, and has that and put  that back in and the patient kind of rotate on it with some pressure, and that, puts it in as a  matter of fact, I think Dwight typically does not even do the joint injection. He does some -  times, but he's gotten good enough with just that technique of rolling them there, that he  can get them to click on. I know some people have done that. I typically do that a little bit  later if I can't, but again, that is something you could do as well if the patient's super  09/01/25   Page   of 8   19

SSC 2.0 - 317: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 1  scared of the needles. Just think in your mind's eye, that I'm distracting that condyle, mov -  ing it forward as well as medial in order to sneak it back under the disc or alternatively al -  low that disc to squirt back on top of the condyle. Once again, shouldn't be a, I wonder if it  worked. Should always be a, that is clearly, that clearly worked.  What if they don’t Unlock?   [0:25:54]  All right, so now what if it doesn't work? So what if they don't unlock? Well, sometimes  they don't unlock. So here's the bummer is sometimes they don't unlock. The longer  they've been locked, the worse the odds are of getting them unlocked, but still try. Not  gonna hurt. My previous world record for our practice, was about two years. I had a patient  that was locked for just about two years, and we unlocked her.  [0:26:24]  Both of my partners have beat my world record. I'm not positive who it is that has that  record now, if it's Kevin or Cameron, but both of them have had patients that have been  locked for more than two years, and they've got them unlocked. Now having said that, the  three of us, have all had patients locked for a month or two, that we've not been able to get  unlocked. So there's a lot kind of going on there with the why are they locked and any ad -  hesions may have occurred, things like that. And sometimes it's very difficult to get people  unlocked. So you're not gonna be 100% in this. So get over that pretty quick. Go in hoping  that you're gonna unlock them clearly, but if you don't, don't beat yourself up too much be -  cause it happens to the best of us.  Sometimes, they aren’t Locked in the First Place   [0:27:11]  Now here's the other thing. Sometimes they aren't locked in the first place. So did you get  an MRI? If not, maybe now's the time. This Spencer Study Club member that reached out  to me the other day, said in her question to me, she's like, yeah, the patient didn't want to  get an MRI and I said back to her, it's not up to the patient. So particularly as more of a  beginner in this, that's non-negotiable. Because you don't know if they're locked or not.  You think they are, the history makes sense. Everything makes sense that they're locked.  They deflect, they open 26 millimeters, they used to click, now they don't.  [0:27:52]  Man, you got a really good chance they're locked. Well, the phrase that I like to say to pa -  tients in this case is, “Before I stick a needle in the side of your head, I'd like to be 100%  sure. Would you like me to be 100% sure before I stick a needle in the side of your head?”  “Would you like me to be 100% sure before we charge you 1,200 bucks, 1,500 bucks,  2,000 bucks to do this procedure?” Most sane people are gonna say, yes, I would like you  to be 100% sure. Now I know getting an MRI isn't easy for all of you. It may not be as hard  09/01/25   Page   of 9   19

SSC 2.0 - 317: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 1  as you think, but I know it's not typically easy. So if you're in Canada, they might have to  travel to the United States to get that MRI. 'Cause they may not be able to get one in  Canada.  [0:28:38]  But on the other hand, I know that there are private MRI centers in Canada, not every -  where of course, but they might be able to get into one of those. If you are in the United  States, then there are for sure private MRI centers near you, and you would be surprised  at how little you can get an MRI for. So typically, it's about 500-700 bucks. That fee has not  gone up. I've said that same $500-$700 for more than ten years, and they're not charging  more. And they're awesome. MRIs are awesome. So get the MRI and be certain you know  where the disc is.  Next Step   [0:29:15]  All right, next step. So maybe, we give the patient some time, we try again. I won't typically  inject them multiple times and try to insufflate the joint or something and get them on. I'll  give them some time. And what we'll typically do, on the give them some time and try  again is we will make them this temporary splint. And the reason, is we're going to try to  distract that joint a little bit and maybe we get lucky. This doesn't happen that often, but it  has happened. Maybe we get lucky in just the act of them having that spacer between  their teeth with some natural movement, even eating with the splint in, and we get lucky  and they pop. We're gonna teach that patient what to look for. But normally, what we do if  they don't unlock, is we give them a week with the temporary splint, and then we try to un -  lock them again. MRI, absolutely. Again, we wanna know for sure that the disc is out of  place.  [0:30:09]  And quick story on that, I had a woman that came in and she had fallen and hit her chin on  a desk, and she presented for all the world of having a non-reducing disc displacement.  The thing that was a little weird, is she didn't remember much popping or clicking before.  But everything else added up, the range of motion, the deflection, all that stuff was classic.  So we did an unlocking procedure without the MRI. I think it was just a financial thing that  she wasn't gonna be able to do that MRI. So we went ahead and like, oh, what the heck,  let's go ahead. And I did the unlocking procedure and it didn't work. And I'm like, that's  strange. And I think I actually did a second unlocking procedure and it didn't work. And  then I talked her into getting an MRI and I'll be darned if she wasn't on the disc.  [0:31:01]  She was on the disc the whole time. So it wasn't a disc problem. It was more of a muscular  problem. She'd had like a muscular injury and we weren't treating the muscle, we were  treating the joint. So once we got the accurate diagnosis, we switched gears and treated  the problem that she actually had, and then she did fine. It's always about the diagnosis.  09/01/25   Page   of 10   19

SSC 2.0 - 317: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 1  Arthrocentesis   [ 0:31:22]  Next could be arthrocentesis. Now I'm not a big fan of arthrocentesis anymore, because  arthrocentesis usually involves injecting a steroid in the joint, as well as just flushing it out.  But you could do this and you might do this in someone who's scared of the injection, but  they're not scared of being sedated. I know that seems weird, like they'd be scared of a  shot here, but they're not scared of a shot here in their arm, but lots of people are like that.  So we have done some arthrocentesis where the oral surgeon sedates the patient, they do  their thing, get them back on the disc, which they almost always do, and then I just say,  hey, hold on the steroid, we don't need the steroid, and then we do our temporary splint  right there. So when I say we're talking about this and stuff, I'm literally there in the office,  because of the next thing here is be prepared when it pops and we need to be prepared  for when it pops. And if they do the arthrocentesis and they don't do the next step, that pa -  tient's just going to be locked by the time they get to your office anyway.  Be Prepared for when it POPS!   [0:32:29]  Okay. So be prepared for when it pops. If you get them back on the disc and then they  close their teeth together, they'll come back off. So the teeth are the dictators here, and  they remember a non-reducing distal displacement patient was recently a what? Were  they recently... Give you a multiple choice question here, were they recently reducing disc  displacement or normal? They were recently reducing disc displacement. So their jaw  popped and clicked, and then they went non-reducing disc displacement, which means not  popping and clicking. Your goal is to get them back to reducing. When the teeth go togeth -  er, the disc will be out of place. Now again, before they locked, they were able to tolerate  that, and they would open and pop back into place. But since they've locked now, we need  to keep them on the disc for a while, to encourage the disc to stay in place and to not lock  up again. If we ignore that, they are most likely going to lock up again. So we do our splint  orthotic here and as I wrote here, you must fit the patient with a splint immediately to help  stabilize the disc position.  [0:33:44]  Now I had one of my mentors, and I kind of found this funny that he did it this way, particu -  larly after I showed him how to do a temporary splint. So I kind of came up with that tech -  nique of the temporary splint I'll show you here in a minute. And he would take impressions  of the patient and make a splint. And that was rather brutal, 'cause we're not talking scan -  ners, although even a scanner, you got to have them open pretty big to get that scanner in  their mouth. But we're talking full on impression trays, because he would do an upper im -  09/01/25   Page   of 11   19

SSC 2.0 - 317: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 1  pression and a lower impression in order to get models and make splints, so that once he  got them unlocked, he was able to fit the splints right that minute.  [0:34:31]  Wow. So we didn't like being that mean, if you will, so we came up with a technique to  make a temporary splint. And when you're going through this, when you're doing all this  stuff, you're gonna sweat. You're gonna sweat that first time. You're gonna think stuff's  gonna happen. Trust me, bad things usually do not happen with this. Knock on wood, I've  never had anything bad happen. I've had one patient kind of feel a little faint or woozy,  never broken a condyle, even though you're kind of pushing pretty hard. I've never had  anyone's condyle break. The kind of worst case scenario is, you don't get them back on  the disc.  Immediate Splint Options  Aqualizer   [0:35:12]  So here's some options for this immediate splint. Aqualizer, our water-filled splint, remem -  ber that? So I love the Aqualizer. Love it. Awesome. Not for this purpose. Better than noth -  ing, but not ideal. Why not? Well, because it won't direct the jaw. So the Aqualizer, one of  the advantages of the Aqualizer actually, is it lets the jaw go where the jaw wants to go. So  if the mandible wants to posture a little bit forward, great. If it doesn't, great. You just have  this spacer between the teeth, and when the person swallows, their jaw goes to wherever  it goes. We want something that directs the jaw into the spot that keeps them on the disc.  Custom Splint   [0:35:56]  Well, custom splint, I just talked about that with my mentor, getting the impressions is eas -  ier said than done, and then you're probably still going to need to modify the splint, like  add acrylic to it in their mouth, in order to bring it to the right spot that captures the disc,  keeps them on the disc. So that's almost like insult to injury, is you've already done the  shots and all that stuff, and now you're gonna put this plastic in, and then you've got to put  a nail salon, you've got to put acrylic, live acrylic into their mouth to set up in the right spot,  and maybe they're having a hard time biting down or whatever. Just a nightmare. Forget  that.  Custom Made Temporary Splint   [0:36:32]  09/01/25   Page   of 12   19

SSC 2.0 - 317: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 1  So the best method, in my opinion, is to make a temporary splint chair side right after the  unlocking, and that's what this thing here is. So this is a thermoplastic splint that I'll walk  you through how to make. We teach this at courses live, but you can also just figure this  out. If you get the thermoplastic beads, you can make this. It's simple to do. Well, it's sim -  ple, but it's not easy. It takes some practice to get good at it, but the procedure itself is not  that difficult, and you're going to make this in the position that keeps them on the disc. So  a lot of people have named splints after themselves over the years. There's the Gelb  splint, there's the Ferris splint, there's a bunch of other splints that are named after people.  And I thought, you know what?  [0:37:19]  I came up with this temporary splint thing. I'm gonna name it after myself. So I call it the  Spencer Bilaterally Indexed Nathalogic Early Guidance Orthotic. That's a bit of a mouthful,  though, so you can just use the acronym from Bilaterally Indexed Nathalogic Early Guid -  ance Orthotic, or in other words, the Spencer Big Ego. So by the way, that's a joke. Don't  call it the Spencer Big Ego. Just call it a temporary splint.  Patient Education   [0:37:47]  It is extremely important to educate the patient on what is going on. This is the most impor -  tant part. I had a lot of most important parts here at this point, haven't I? So getting into the  capsule, making sure that it pops, all of that stuff, critically important.   At this point, if you've  had a successful unlocking, this is the most important. This is the most important part now,  because if you don't do this part, they are going to lock for sure. Okay. It doesn't take that  much.  [0:38:21]  So let's say, you give me the temporary splint. All right, well, what's 1% occlusion say?  How much time am I actually gonna hold my teeth on that? Well, it could be 1% if it's a 1%  occluder. So how much do I have to move my jaw to pop back off the disc? If I'm off the  disc here, what if I went like this? I'm off the disc now. You follow? So all they got to do is  retrieve their jaw a little bit. All they got to do is move their jaw laterally to the side that was  locked, and that just moved their condyle back on that side. Are people gonna know that  their jaw is now stuck? Not necessarily. Where were these folks before? Reducing disc  displacement. Where are they used to having their disc? Off.  [0:39:10]  Okay. They didn't know, that when they opened and it clicked, it was going into the right  place. They thought the opposite. They're just all freaked out now because it's not popping  anymore. But even then, it's pretty rare that somebody comes in, they're like, hey, you  know what? I can't open anymore. I think it's because my disc is out of place, and it's been  out of place a lot, but I could always open and it would pop into place. I don't think I've ever  had anyone say that. So you have to teach them what in place means. You have to teach  09/01/25   Page   of 13   19

SSC 2.0 - 317: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 1  them that that click when they open is good, but you've given them this temporary splint to  close into, so they can open and close, open and close fully, without the click. Okay. That  is super-duper-duper important.  Temporary Splint Fabrication   [0:39:57]  So let's walk through the steps of fitting or making the temporary splint. So the ThermAcryl  is what you're gonna use. So you could use ThermAcryl Plus instead of ThermAcryl, but I  like using ThermAcryl because it's white, so it's less noticeable. It takes longer to set up  than the ThermAcryl plus, but the fact also that it gets clear when it's hot, and then it be -  comes white and opaque when it sets up allows you to visually see where you're at in the  process here. It does shrink a little bit, as it cools and you can use that to your advantage  as well to get better retention.  Step 1   [0:40:36]  All right, so the safest way to warm up the ThermAcryl beads is actually with hot water, be -  cause it's never gonna be so hot that you're gonna burn yourself with the beads. What you  see here in this picture, is we've taken them and put them in a Pyrex bowl and put that in  the microwave and then that will do it too. Just if you do that, make gosh darn sure that  you have gloves on, when you go to grab this because you will, I promise you, you will  molten lava hot this stuff and you can't tell until you grab it and then you're going to imme -  diately rip your gloves off before you give yourself a third degree burn.  [0:41:16]  After a while, you'll figure out based on the power of your microwave how long you need to  put this in there, so that it doesn't become molten lava hot. Okay. So you can start with wa -  ter and water is very safe to do the ThermAcryl beads and it's not gonna matter. It doesn't  change the retention or any of that stuff of it. So water is fine, totally fine, but after a while,  you'll just be like, yeah, just microwave it and you don't have to mess with the water. Now  frankly, I just said you don't have to mess with the water, but you're gonna have to have  water there anyway for the next step.  Step 2   [0:41:44]  So once we have pinched up our amount of ThermAcryl, and this is where the practice  comes in because if you use way too much, it's gonna be a massive hassle. So you want  to get the right amount. Too little, and you're not gonna be able to make a splint that's big  enough to have good retention. Too much and it's gonna be super duper thick, and that's  09/01/25   Page   of 14   19

SSC 2.0 - 317: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 1  gonna be really hard for the patient to use, and you're not ever going to want to take a burr  to this. Ever, never, ever, ever. If you figure out that's like, you know what, I use too much.  This is too thick. Then you start over and you take that out, you put it back in the hot water,  make it all melted again, and then you rip off an inch of material, make your little hot dog  thing, and then do it again.  Step 3 & 4   [0:42:33]  So we're gonna put this into a horseshoe shape, basically an arch form. I'm gonna stick it  on the teeth and then push down with our fingers on the lingual, making it nice and thin on  the lingual, and then push it down over on the buckle and the anterior. We're gonna make  a splint live in the mouth, and you're making a splint and it should look good. It should be  the right thickness on top. You need it to be tall enough and you've practiced before this,  where you're gonna bring their jaw to capture the disc. So after you've done the unlocking  procedure and we got them popping now, now we're going to do like we are in a initial ex -  amination. And we're gonna have them open, pop, close down, front teeth. Okay, cool.  Open. Yeah, open, open. Oh, good. We're on the disc.  [0:43:23]  Okay. Maybe there aren't. Maybe you have to put a couple tongue depressors between  their front teeth and have them open and close on that. So then you know, okay, I need a  little thickness there. I can't have them go all the way to their front teeth touching, and  have it stay on the disc. You might have to bring them forward a little bit, but don't go too  far forward because nobody can do that. Nobody can actually stay out here and all they do  is relax and then boom, they're off the disc again. So experiment in advance with where do  I need the jaw to be, and what opening do I need the jaw be in order to stay on the disc to  capture the disc, to keep the disc on the condyle, which is called what? CR. So we want  the disc on the condyle. We want them in centric relation. So this is a temporary centric  relation splint. You could put that right in your chart.  Step 5 & 6   [ 0:44:15]  Okay. We place over the patient's mandible teeth, tuck it in like I said, then have the pa -  tient close in the position that keeps the disc reduced. We've practiced this in advance like  I mentioned, and then we're gonna let it start becoming opaque. And when it's doing this,  you can have them open and close. Give them a little tap tap, making sure, yep, we're on  the disc. Okay. So we know that this is real. This is the position, and it's gonna go from  pretty clear, and see your teeth clearly through that. Here it's becoming more opaque, and  then here is about the time that we're gonna want to sneak it off the teeth a little bit, and  then put it back on so that it doesn't lock onto the teeth.  09/01/25   Page   of 15   19

SSC 2.0 - 317: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 1  Step 7   [0:44:56]  It's very unlikely that it would do that, but this is the point that you would just kind of take it  off. So we take it off and trim off any excess material. As I mentioned here, you're going to  use Dean's scissors. These are also sometimes called surgical scissors. So these are a  long handled scissor, allows you to have a lot of torque on it. You are not gonna do this  with a bur. I know you're gonna be tempted. You're gonna be like, I can do it. I can do it  with a bur.  [0:45:20]  No, you can't, 'cause it's just going to gunk up the bur and not work at all and not be  smooth, and it's going to be awful. And how do I know? 'Cause we tried. So don't do it.  Just do it with the scissors. And if it's too thick, abort, put it back in the hot water, get it all  over again, take off the excess material, start over. I would strongly encourage you to do  multiple of these on somebody until you get satisfied. You're like, all right, that's awesome.  That looks really nice. And then, you know what you're gonna do? You're gonna teach your  team. So me and my partners, we haven't made a temporary splint other than in teaching  situations forever. Our team members do all of this. The unlocking procedure, the doctor  comes in, does the shot, patient's moving around most of the time, pops onto the disc,  doctor's back in. Hey, awesome. Good for you. Let's check. Yep, great. That's the bite that  we're gonna do. Hey, Lori, go ahead and take it from here. And then our assistant takes it  from there.  Step 8   [0:46:22]  Okay. You'll get there too, but healthy for you to learn these steps so that you could do  them if you had to, and also so you can teach your team members. Now, we didn't take a  bur to it. We just trimmed off with scissors, and then we go back into the hot water and just  smooth off where we cut it with our finger. And works super duper well, very smooth, easy  to do.  Step 9   [0:46:46]  Next, we cool the splint, check the position, make sure that it keeps the disc reduced. If it  doesn't, start over. So super important to keep the disc reduced. If it doesn't, then you start  over. You're not gonna try to add plastic to it or stuff like that. Tried it all. We've done all  that. It's not worth it. So if you know it's like, ah, dang it, they're too far down. I need them  open a little bit more. Then you're going to start over, but you're gonna make it higher, and  09/01/25   Page   of 16   19

SSC 2.0 - 317: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 1  then you're gonna watch when they bite down. You might even need to put a tongue de -  pressor or a cotton tip applicator or something else between their front teeth for them to  close down onto, 'cause you don't want them to go all the way 'cause that allows the disc  to reduce.  [0:47:34]  Okay. So figure that out on the fly, but from personal experience, adding thermoplastic is  clunky. It can bond to itself, but it's really hard to do. It seems like it wouldn't be that hard,  but it's harder than you would think. So I would just start over. In that case, if I need more  vertical, then I'm adding material. So I'm gonna add more, so that I can still push it down  on the buckle and the lingual, but I can make it taller on the occlusal. So when they close  down, they don't have to close down quite so far to get those indentations.  Step 10   [ 0:48:09]  Okay. Number 10, if the position's effective, educate the patient on how to tell if their disc  is in place or out of place. Show how the splint helps keep it in place. Helps in big old caps  there, because the splint does not keep it in place. If they hold their teeth on it all the time,  then theoretically that would hold it in place, but they probably aren't, are they? They're not  gonna do that. They're not gonna go for the next four days with their teeth clenched to -  gether into the splint the whole time.  [0:48:37]  So as soon as they're doing what I'm doing right now, called talking, they could get off the  disc. As soon as they go like this, they're off the disc. So we have to teach them, back to  our patient education part, how do you know if you're on the disc? What's going on? If I  open, can I do full range of motion? Things like that. Now, one other thing on the retention,  if it doesn't seem to be grabbing the teeth as well as you'd like, you can dip it in the hot wa -  ter just very briefly, just kind of one, one thousand, two, one thousand, back on the teeth,  give a little bit of pushing with your fingers on there, and then let it set up for 30 seconds or  so, but before it's completely set, take it out and put it in ice water. And then that'll shrink  set it, and it will be way tighter after you do that. Not normally necessary to do that. We  don't have to have them necessarily eat with the splint in. I like them to eat with the splint  in 'cause it's more of a safety net. It's gonna put that space between the teeth, and then  the other thing too is, I can then for sure tell if they've worn it, 'cause if they eat with it in,  it's gonna stain it.  [0:49:48]  And if they come back and I'm like, hey, you're locked again. Yeah, I know. Yeah, bummer.  I thought that might have happened. Did you wear it all the time? Did you only take it out to  brush your teeth? Did you wear it to eat? Oh yeah, I wore it to eat all the time, and it's pris -  tine clear, or I mean white, it's pristine white. No flipping way, did they wear it to eat. You  09/01/25   Page   of 17   19

SSC 2.0 - 317: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 1  eat anything like spaghetti sauce or anything reddish at all, and it's gonna stain. If they eat  anything at all, it's probably gonna stain. So that's what we do.  Follow-Up   [0:50:24]  For follow-up, we have the patient call the next morning, or you could send them a text, or  have Weave reach out to them, or whatever you want to do, but just make sure you talk to  them the next morning. The most likely time for them to lock, is when they sleep that night.  Once again, this temporary splint is not holding their jaw into a position, is it? It's there to,  when they swallow, bring them into the right spot. Now, if they are not clenching on their  back teeth or moving their jaw in a weird way, then theoretically, they are typically down  and forward from their habitual occlusion anyway.  [0:51:00]  So they're typically in a position that will keep them on the disc. It's just when their teeth  come together, that they get back off the disc. Now, you might be asking at this point, why  don't I just give them a sleep appliance? Well, you definitely could, and a sleep appliance  would be more likely to keep them on the disc. We've done thousands of these, like I said,  and most of the time, the people do stay on the disc, or we would have changed. We  would have changed years ago. We've been treating sleep apnea for 25 years, so it would  have been logical to just, well, let's just use a mandibular advancement appliance, not  necessarily advancing the jaw, but just keeping the jaw from falling backwards. That  makes sense. So why don't we? Well, it just costs more. So that's why. But if you have  somebody who does lock, and they wake up locked, which almost always it will be, then  you might move to something like an EMA to keep their jaw from falling backwards. So we  call the next morning or we contact the patient the next morning. Can they do three fingers  and do they feel unlocked?  [0:52:02]  And that may seem pretty subjective to ask that question, but it isn't because the patient  knows what it feels like to be locked. They know what it feels like to not be locked. And so  you ask, do you feel like you are unlocked still? And they'll tell you, and they'll be right al -  most always. Occasionally, someone will be wrong, but it's rare. Again, they know what it  feels like because that's why they came in, in the first place, is they knew there was some -  thing wrong. So when you see them in a week, can they open three fingers? Do they de -  flect? Now, if you take the splint out, take the temporary splint out, and they put their teeth  together fully, what's likely to happen? Well, they're gonna come off the disc. 'Cause  there's probably no room for their occlusion to be altogether, their condyle to be seated as  far superior as it has been in the past and have that disc have room to be on top of the  condyle.  [0:52:56]  09/01/25   Page   of 18   19

SSC 2.0 - 317: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 1  That's why they have reducing displacement in the first place, which is why they ultimately  went to a non-reducing displacement. Or they won't be able to get their teeth together. So  if they can't get their back teeth together, because they've been held forward muscularly in  this position every time they swallow, that sounds a lot like wearing a sleep appliance,  doesn't it? And that's totally okay. So in this scenario, if they take the temporary splint out  and they're like, yeah, my back teeth don't touch, they probably won't say that. But if they  don't click, and they're opening fully wide and they don't click, check their bite. And if it's  like, oh yeah, you're wide open in the back. Great. So that means they're on the disc,  they're in normal position. Now they're in CR. Their teeth aren't touching. And that's why  they aren't touching, is because they're actually in centric relation. Okay. So now are we  just gonna restore them there or whatever? No, probably not. Our goal is to get them back  to that reducing disc displacement. So over time, as we have them start going off of that  temporary splint, they'll get their teeth closer together, and eventually they'll start clicking.  [0:54:03]  Then we treat them with something like the Ferris style night guard if they were locking at  night, and/or a mandibular day splint in centric relation to encourage them to stay on the  disc, be in this reducing disc displacement level. So now, you got to go back to advanced  TMD and the splint therapy stuff to be like, all right, well, when would I put them into splint  therapy? When would I consider phase two? When would I do all that stuff? So the answer  to that question is, it depends. How did it happen? When did it happen? Did they wake up  locked? Is that typically what's happened for them in the past? Well, then that could just be  a night guard. On the other hand, if they get locked during the day, they find themselves  clenching during the day, that's probably gonna be a mandibular day splint in CR with a  Farris style night guard in CR. That's gonna be dual splint therapy.  [0:54:56]  And of course, we haven't talked about this in section, but we're also going to add PRF to  the mix, because that's going to help heal the tissues there. And again, not necessarily re -  quiring them to go to phase two, but maybe making this reducing disc displacement able  to not lock. Typically, that's our goal is non-reducing back to reducing. And people that are  non-reducing and reducing, that's the same bite. I'll show you the joint videos at the end,  but remember the reducing displacement to non-reducing displacement, there's no oc -  clusal change. It's the normal disc that would require an occlusal change. Non-reducing to  reducing or vice-versa, reducing to non-reducing, it's the same bite. Same, no room for the  disc when the teeth are together.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 19   19

