SSC 2.0 - 405: 16 Steps to Better MD Relationships  SSC 2.0   Level 4  405: 16 Steps to Better MD Relationships  [intro music]  16 Steps to Gain Trust, Respect, and Confidence   [0:00:12]  That was kind of an overview of what you can do to gain trust and respect with your local  medical community and your local medical sleep community. Now let me give you 16 spe -  cific things that you can do that will help. And this will be whether you have been doing this  for a while or you're just getting involved. If you're just getting involved, this can be really  helpful because you want to build a strong foundation.  Number 1   [0:00:37]  So number 1 of 16, contract with medical insurance and, I might put or Medicare. I en -  courage all dentists to contract with Medicare. And why that is, is if you are, let's say you're  a fee for service dentist, and you're like, no way, Jamison, not going to work with insur -  ance. No way, no how, no never. You might still work with Medicare. And here's why, and  this can be a little confusing, but Medicare has the option for you to be so-called participat -  ing and non-participating. Non-participating sounds like you're not participating with  Medicare. That would be the logical stringing together of those words, but that's not actual -  ly what it means.  [0:01:23]  A non-participating provider means you're a provider for Medicare durable medical equip -  ment, DME, that's where we fall under currently anyway. And that means that you're able  to treat the patient and then Medicare will pay their amount to the patient. Participating  means that you accept assignment. That means whatever Medicare is going to pay, check  goes to you. That's all you're going to take. You're not going to charge the patient anymore  unless they have a little copay or something like that, but it would be very specific on the  maximum they're going to pay. Non-participating, you can charge whatever you want. And  then the amount that Medicare covers will go to the patient directly. That's kind of awe -  some because it allows you to charge whatever you feel comfortable with, and then the  patient will get the reimbursement from Medicare directly. You do have to follow the rules.  You have to make sure you're using the appliance that Medicare says you can use and  that all the criteria are met and that you have all the documentation. You still have to follow  those rules. But it's, as a fee-for-service dentist, you may be completely, not even would  09/01/25   Page   of 1   19

SSC 2.0 - 405: 16 Steps to Better MD Relationships  consider the idea of working with medical insurance. If Blue Cross of your state says, well,  sure, dentist, you can be a network medically as long as you are dentally.  [0:02:52]  And you're like, well, no, I'm not going to work with you dentally. There's kind of the two  sides. One side would be the dentist who does not want to deal with insurance at all, how -  ever, has Medicare age patients. And why not have them get their Medicare benefit?  That's how I would look at that. You could be non-participating, so-called, with Medicare  and your patients would at least get that benefit. Your fee-for-service for everybody else,  you don't have to cut your fees. You do that. That's one road. And then the other road  would be a dentist who already is in network with most dental insurances and things like  that. In your case, you might want to consider being in network medically in addition to  dentally. And why? Let's talk about why would I want to work with insurance? And I know  we've talked about this in other levels. And why this is number one in my kind of specific  things here is doctors really care a lot about this and they're going to refer to you if you're a  network. As a matter of fact, if there's two dentists next door to each other and one has  credentials galore, they are boarded and they've taken all sorts of CE and maybe even  they have a lot of experience. And then their next door neighbor doesn't have boards, real -  ly hasn't been doing it that long, but they're in network with every medical insurance. Most  physicians are going to refer to the one in network with medical insurance. Okay. Now they  may tell the patient, yeah, the doctor could even go to the dentist with all the credentials  and they may even say that.  [0:04:30]  Yeah, I go to doctor whoever, they're awesome. They fit me with an appliance, heads up,  don't work with your insurance, pretty expensive. On the other hand, next door neighbor, I  don't know them as well. They're not, don't have a lot of credentials or experience, but  they're in network with your insurance. It's going to cost you a lot less out of pocket. A lot of  patients are going to go that direction. This is a big deal on the Medicare. A lot of your  medical colleagues, a lot of their patients are Medicare more than 50% often. Just that one  hit, if even if you're a fee for service dentist, if you're just like, Hey, yeah, we work with  Medicare. They're going to be like, Oh, no way. And you're like, yeah, it's covered by  Medicare. The patient gets a benefit from Medicare. Go ahead and refer over your  Medicare patients. And we'd love to help everybody else.  [0:05:16]  We don't work with other insurances, but we do with work with Medicare. The doctors are  going to refer to you. Once again, the question of why even work with medical insurance,  the answer is it makes it easier for people to say yes. And it makes it more likely that  physicians are going to refer to you. That's the why. If you don't have capacity to see a  bunch of people, then you probably wouldn't work with insurance because you just don't  have enough room and you would be fee for service and only treat the people that you  kind of really want to treat and that can afford your treatment. If you have capacity issues,  then I would stick there. With regard to working with medical insurance, I could not more  highly recommend Erica Johannes's system or her program. Dr. Erica Johannes, who's  09/01/25   Page   of 2   19

SSC 2.0 - 405: 16 Steps to Better MD Relationships  been a member of Spencer Study Club from the beginning, put this together. She had to  learn all of the medical billing stuff 'cause she had to. She was kind of a one-man show, a  one-woman show, and she ran everything herself. And she learned all of this, and then  she started having dentists ask her questions all the time and ask her billing help ques -  tions and things.  [0:06:22]  And so she put together a program after also teaching others for several years. And this is  a fantastic program. If you are interested in billing medical, I could not more highly recom -  mend that you get this. Our practice paid full fee for Erica's system, Erica's program, be -  cause we have some turnover in that position. We're very blessed that our main billing  people have been with us for decades, and they are experts, but they can't do everything  themselves. They have people that help them, and we use Erica's program to train our  new hires. And that has been worth its weight in gold because they come in, and the first  thing they do is they just watch all these videos. And then that means that our main billing  people that are already trained and already doing this, they're still working. Whereas his -  torically, they would have had to take time out of their day to train people and get them up  to speed. And this person's just watching them work and whatever. The program is awe -  some. And this takes you through how to get in network with Medicare if you want, and  then how to work with insurance and all the coding and all that kind of stuff.  Number 2   [0:07:38]  Number two, screen all of your patients. And when I say all, I mean all. And you can go  back to level two where we talk about that and how to do that. But in a nutshell, you just  want to be screening your patients and letting them know, hey, American Dental Associa -  tion has asked all dentists since 2017 to be screening all of our patients for possible sleep-  related breathing disorders. The reason they've asked us to do that is just like with head,  neck cancer screenings, which dentists have done for decades. We do those not because  we treat cancer, but because there's things we can pick up early that could potentially save  someone's life. With sleep-related breathing disorders, same thing. There's things that we  can pick up early that could potentially save your life. And then use the screening forms,  screen all of your patients.  Number 3   [0:08:25]  Number three, related to number two, send at least one to two quality referrals. And I might  change this a little bit to per week. Now, you're going to have at least one obvious sleep  apnea patient in the morning and at least one obvious sleep apnea patient in the after -  noon. But they may not be high quality. Take quality over quantity. What do I mean by  09/01/25   Page   of 3   19

SSC 2.0 - 405: 16 Steps to Better MD Relationships  that? On the quality referral, it's someone that you're quite confident has sleep apnea, but  the more important part is you're quite confident that they're going to go, that they're going  to be a good patient for the sleep doctor or primary care doctor that you're working with,  that they will keep their appointment, that they will pay on time, that they will have medical  insurance, that the sleep doctor or primary care doctor, they're not going to have to worry  about collecting money and whatnot, that someone you've worked with over the years that  you know is nice and does what you ask them to. They're compliant with treatment. That's  what I mean by a high quality referral. And something that I've heard in the past in various  places that I've worked, but a specific example I'm thinking of was in North Carolina. I re -  member the sleep doctor that we worked with there who happened to be a primary care  sleep doctor, one of those unicorns, and he would comment that our practices, our group  of practices there sent him the best referrals.  [0:09:56]  And what he meant by that is our patients were prepared. They knew why they were being  referred as opposed to his kind of typical medical referrals who would be like, why am I  coming in again? And who are you? And why are you calling me? And the people that we  sent would be like, oh yeah, my dentist said that I might need a sleep study, but that I  needed to meet with you first and you would decide if I need a sleep study or not. And  yeah, I'm really tired all the time and I hope that this is what's going on 'cause that could  be amazing if that could be helped. That's what you're going for, quality referrals. Ultimate  goal really shouldn't be that hard for you to send one to two a day, but at first try to go for  one to two a week. That's going to get their attention. After a few weeks and you've been  completely off the radar and now all of a sudden twice a week, this physician is being like,  okay, who's Dr. Smith? I've never heard of her before. They're going to start piquing their  interest of like, well, who is she and why is she referring these people and why are they so  awesome?  [0:11:06]  And then if you then jump that up to four a week and to six a week and maybe eight a  week, then all of a sudden you're going to become potentially one of their number one re -  ferral sources. In our practices, our practices are in the top 10% of referring doctors to the  sleep lab. And that's with cardiologists in the mix and pulmonologists and all sorts of other  people who think about sleep apnea routinely. Our practice, historically, we are in the top  referral sources of sleep labs in our area.  Number 4   [0:11:38]  Number four, discuss oral appliance therapy before you send the patient to the sleep doc -  tor. As part of this discussion, you're going to say something like, hey, Sarah, I don't know  if you need a sleep study or not, but if you're open to having a conversation with Dr. Ras -  mus, the sleep doctor we work with, you and Dr. Rasmus will have that discussion and de -  09/01/25   Page   of 4   19

SSC 2.0 - 405: 16 Steps to Better MD Relationships  cide if you need a sleep study or not. And let's say you do. If you do need a sleep study,  then I really hope you have sleep apnea. And again, the patient's like, what? Why would  you hope that?  [0:12:13]  I hope you have sleep apnea because then maybe that's why your jaw is hurting. Maybe  you're clenching your teeth, thrusting your jaw, you're doing something to try to protect  your airway. Remember I was talking about that? Maybe that's what's going on. If that is  what's going on, then treating your sleep apnea actually could resolve your jaw pain, which  is why you came in to see us. That'd be amazing. Now, if you do end up having a sleep  study and you end up having sleep apnea, Dr. Rasmus is very likely to talk to you about  CPAP. Are you familiar with CPAP, with the mask and stuff? Most patients are familiar with  it. Well, that's a great treatment and a lot of people really love it. And if you can stand it, it  will tend to work very well for you. On the other hand, because of your jaw problem, there  could be an argument made for us treating you with an oral appliance that's going to pro -  tect your jaw joint and it's going to take the pressure off your jaw joint. And we can kind of  also protect your teeth and kill multiple birds with one stone here.  [0:13:11]  This is what it looks like. And I would show them the oral appliance in my hand and some -  times even be like, yeah, this is packing for a trip and you kind of pantomime putting it into  your pocket. This is it. This is the whole thing. That can be helpful because then you can  say, yeah if the sleep doctor says you might need to do CPAP, you could actually bring up,  hey, my dentist mentioned that maybe an oral appliance might be in the mix here. What do  you think? And they'll have that conversation. Particularly when you're more beginning or if  the sleep community where you are hasn't done a ton of oral appliance therapy, and that's  just not something that they routinely recommend 'cause they haven't had a resource like  you, it is very common for them to just talk about CPAP and nothing else. But if the patient  says, oh, remember, I was sent by Dr. Spencer and he said there might be a possibility of  me using an oral appliance. What do you think? Then often the sleep doctor would be like,  oh, well, yeah, actually your AHI here is eight. Yeah, why don't you try an oral appliance?  And that, it will be cool.  [0:14:15]  If you don't bring it up to the patient, the patient won't know to bring it up. The doctor will  almost assuredly put them on CPAP, even if they have an AHI of six. That takes a little  while to get used to this. Just have that conversation in advance. Let them know. Again,  don't dog CPAP. That'd be a massive mistake if you're like, oh, yeah, by the way, and  CPAP sucks. Well, technically it blows. You're going to hate it. You say that, they're going  to go to the sleep doctor and go, yeah, my dentist told me about CPAP. He said that it was  going to be awful, that I was going to hate it. He said it blew. Yeah, I'm not excited about  that. Not cool. If you do talk about CPAP, say, hey it works for a ton of people. Some peo -  ple struggle with it. For you, if your problem is mild to moderate, it may be logical for the  sleep doctor to just have you do an oral appliance first. This way we get to protect your  09/01/25   Page   of 5   19

SSC 2.0 - 405: 16 Steps to Better MD Relationships  teeth and whatnot and protect your airway at the same time. Just plant that seed so that  the patient can bring it up with the doctor.  Number 5   [0:15:14]  Okay, next, meet with and or call the sleep doctor or primary care doctor. This will be a lit -  tle bit more important with the primary care doctor, actually. But if you are referring some -  one that is not a fat old man, then you're going to need to do a little due diligence with a  primary care doctor. Sleep doctors will almost always get a sleep study because they are  smart enough to know that they can't just look at somebody and tell if they have sleep ap -  nea or not. Or rather, they're smart enough to know that there are people they can just  look at and they know they have sleep apnea, but they still got to get the sleep study to  prove it to insurance. And then there's other people that they can't necessarily just look at  them, but they're pretty confident they have sleep apnea, but they still got to get a sleep  study to have insurance and play the game. Sleep doctors are almost always going to do a  sleep study. Makes sense. Primary care doctors, on the other hand, they may not. Primary  care doctors may be just like, eh, we don't need to do that.  [0:16:11]  You're not a fat old man. I'm sure your dentist is mistaken. You don't have a problem. If  you're going to refer to a primary care doctor, pretty important to make a phone call, let  them, and on that, I talked about this in level two, but let me reiterate it here. If you're call -  ing really any medical doctor, but particularly primary care or doctors that are in medicine,  surgeons, this will not be a problem 'cause surgeons are not expected to get on the phone.  Primary care doctors on the medical side of things kind of are, and this is a courtesy that  they have with each other because they're oftentimes making decisions right in the mo -  ment and they need to talk to the cardiologist or to the neurologist or to the internist or  whatever to decide what they're going to do. Be aware of that and make sure when you  call the primary care doctor, let's say, and you say, hey, this is Dr. Spencer, common pa -  tient. I'm sending my patient to see Dr. Smith for a consultation. Is Dr. Smith available? I  would not do that. Okay? 'Cause they'll say yes, and they'll go get Dr. Smith, and Dr. Smith  is four hours behind, and now they're on the phone with you, and they may not be happy  about that.  [0:17:33]  And remember, everything I teach is from personal experience, I've done all the dumb  things already. You don't have to. What you do is you say, hey, same dialogue at the be -  ginning there. Could you have Dr. Smith call me at her convenience? And here's my cell  phone number. Now, if the front says, hey actually, she's on a break right now I see her  right over there, she could take your call right now if that's better for you. Say, okay, you  sure? Like, you guys aren't running behind or anything like that? Oh, no, we're good. Fine.  Go ahead and do that. Otherwise, just say, hey, here's my cell phone number. Here's my  09/01/25   Page   of 6   19

SSC 2.0 - 405: 16 Steps to Better MD Relationships  office number. I'm going to give my front desk a heads up that if she calls back that I'll take  the call right now. I'll give my cell phone number. She can call me after hours if she wants.  I just want to talk about this referral. Then you need to keep this patient's information with  you for a while because this doctor might, it might be two or three days before they call  you back, and it might be at 8 o'clock at night.  [0:18:26]  I've had medical directors of insurance companies call me at home at 8:30 at night. Just  keep that information, and then when they call, then you kind of go through, hey, I've got  this 24-year-old woman, 115 pounds, 5'7". You would never think that this woman has  sleep apnea, but she's wearing her teeth down like crazy. She has a TMJ problem, and  what got me thinking about sleep apnea is I can't see down her throat, and she says her  boyfriend says that she snores like a sailor and that he's even mentioned that she stops  breathing sometimes when she sleeps. So I'm thinking she might have sleep apnea. I'm  not positive. I wanted to get her over to you. You know her medical history better than I do.  Make a decision on getting her a sleep study or not. If she does have a sleep study, we  might want to try an oral appliance because she's got this kind of underlying TMJ problem  as well, and we could treat both things with the same treatment. That's the dialogue you  would have. Okay? Does that make sense? On the sleep doctors, you typically don't need  to make a phone call.  [0:19:27]  What you might do at the beginning to just kind of make an impression upon them is when  you have a couple patients that have gone through the system, so to speak, find a really  smart question to ask from the sleep study, and then call them, leave a message for them  to call you back, say, I just have a question about this patient and their sleep study, and  then you would ask that question. And that might be something like, hey, doctor, I noticed  that the patient has significantly less apneas and hypopneas on their left side versus  supine. What recommendations do you have for positional therapy 'cause it seems like if  this patient's going to do an oral appliance, as you've suggested, that positional therapy  should be a big part of it. And the physicians would be like, hey, right on. Good for you.  And frankly, they may not have even noticed that in the report. They may not even looked.  Pulmonologist sleep doctors often don't care about positional stuff. You know why? Be -  cause they put people on Autoset CPAP. Autoset CPAP just blows harder if the patient's on  their back, if the patient's in REM. They don't get too worked up about positional therapy.  We do with oral appliance therapy. An oral appliance doesn't work harder when the patient  lies on their back. That would be an intelligent question for you to ask that sleep physician,  and that would make a positive impression on them.  Number 6   [0:20:55]  09/01/25   Page   of 7   19

SSC 2.0 - 405: 16 Steps to Better MD Relationships  Number six, have your staff get to know the sleep doctor or primary care doctor's staff. And  clearly have them be super friendly. That doesn't hurt. A couple of ideas for this. I've had a  few of our Spencer Study Club members that are in our business elite group, a few of  them have open houses. So have we. We had an open house when we opened our new  location in our Salt Lake practice. I believe we did an open house back when we opened  our new office location in our Boise practice as well. These are surprisingly successful.  And this has been done by a Spencer Study Club member in Grand Rapids, in St. Louis,  in other areas. And for the most part, everyone's had a pretty good success rate with that,  meaning sleep doctors, primary care doctors, other referral sources coming to the open  house. I was quite surprised by the results.  [0:21:52]  When we did ours in Salt Lake, I was like, nobody's going to come to this thing. I think we  ended up having like, I don't know, 30, 40 people come. I was shocked. And you don't  have to do that much. We just put out some nice food and drink and stuff. And people  came and they met our staff and we met them and it was pretty cool. Another business  lead member, she will commonly take cool stuff to the offices. And where she practices,  this is not like against the law. There's some areas where if you walk into a hospital, par -  ticularly, and you brought in a box of donuts or something or coffee even, they'd be like,  hey, get out of here. That's a violation. Throw that in the trash. Don't be doing that. Find  that out if you are able to bring in stuff to an office without getting in trouble. Assuming you  are, then there's cool stuff you can do. You can do seasonal things. You can do other stuff.  And so this person goes and her husband is the dentist that's treating the patients and  whatnot.  [0:22:54]  But she goes to these offices and has a... She also works in the office and does a lot of the  telemedicine and works directly with the patients, helps them with their insurances. And  she's going to be the one to calling the medical office to get records and things. And she  has a personal relationship with the staff member at the referral sources. She knows them.  She knows them on a first name basis, has given them gifts. They like her. And this is not  something that's just one time, but several times throughout the year, she will take little  gifts and little knickknacks to them to reinforce that relationship. And of course, when she's  dropping that off, she's reinforcing that relationship. Very, very important. A quick story on  that. I once had a practice we were working with, and there was a little bit of a conflict. And  sometimes doctors don't really understand the hoops that we got to jump through for med -  ical insurance billing and whatnot. And the staff for that doctor were a little annoyed that  they were being asked to get all this paperwork that normally they weren't. They're used to  doing CPAP machines and stuff, and the CPAP companies weren't asking them for all this  stuff.  [0:24:13]  And we were. And lucky for me, the sleep doctor talking to me kind of complained. Now  that means his staff had complained to the point where he felt he needed to say some -  thing. And again, that was a real blessing that our relationship was good enough that he  09/01/25   Page   of 8   19

SSC 2.0 - 405: 16 Steps to Better MD Relationships  felt that he could bring this up. That was good. Then I explained to him why this is. I talked  to his office manager and said, basically, hey, do your patients like to have things covered  by their medical insurance? And she's like, yeah, of course they do. Yeah, I get it, man so  do ours. And it's a real bummer, but we're kind of like pharmacists in this relationship. And  in order for the patient to get reimbursed or us to get paid by insurance for this to be cov -  ered by insurance, there's all these hoops that the insurance company requires. And a lot  of it is paperwork that we have to have on hand from your office. And then what I did is I  said, hey, can I get my billing person together with you, and maybe the four of us, the two  doctors and the two billing people can get together and kind of wrap our heads around  what's the best practice here? What's going to make this the easiest so that the patients  have the best experience?  [0:25:29]  And that's exactly what we did. Came together on one afternoon and had a little meeting.  And again, their staff were at the beginning a little bit, you could tell they kind of had their  guard up a little bit and asked the questions like, why do you need this again? Why do you  need this? And as soon as our side of the case gave our reasoning, they're like, oh, that  totally makes sense. And then by the end, we had a complete system of how we would  work together and everything was cool. Back to the beginning of that story, though, the  only reason that worked was because I had a good working relationship with the doctor.  Had I not, it would have been more likely for that doctor to just be like, okay, let's not work  with him anymore. What a pain in the butt. I can't believe that they're asking for those  things. 'Cause he didn't know. He didn't know all the stuff that we have to do. Your staff be -  ing connected with their staff, really, really, really important.  Number 7   [0:26:26]  Number seven, explain that you only provide oral appliance therapy on prescription from a  physician and that there's often paperwork required for oral appliance therapy that isn't re -  quired with CPAP. That's what I was just talking about.   This is not something that they  know. As a matter of fact, on the CPAP, and I confirmed this with a DME supplier gentle -  man the other day, it is extremely common. You'll hear things like people will get their  CPAP or nowadays an APAP unit, like within 24 hours of a sleep study, okay, or 48 hours if  it's like mailed or something, but it's really fast. And if you know anything about this field  and insurance, you're like, well, how can they get all the paperwork in place that fast?  Well, the answer is they can't and they don't. They just go, they just treat and then get the  paperwork later. Most of us aren't comfortable with that because if the insurance company  is like, hey, there's no face to face with the physician initially before the sleep study, there -  fore we're not paying for any of this, we're out. And our treatments are a big deal. It's ex -  pensive for us to provide these treatments. It's all custom, a lot of chair time involved. Typ -  ically your average dental sleep medicine dentist or probably your 99 percentile dental  09/01/25   Page   of 9   19

SSC 2.0 - 405: 16 Steps to Better MD Relationships  sleep medicine dentist does not treat someone until they've got their ducks in a row. Let  them know this as I just mentioned before.  Number 8   [0:27:53]  What about titrating oral appliances in the sleep lab? Well, this is where you do an in-ser -  vice with the sleep techs. This can be pretty dang cool. The sleep techs are often one of  the first to know, if not the first to know, that a patient's going to struggle with their CPAP  because they are sometimes putting them on CPAP. Now back in the olden days, that's  how you got a CPAP. The continuous positive airway pressure, the patient would come  into the sleep lab, get all wired up for a PSG again like they had in the baseline, and then  they would get the CPAP machine on and the technician in the other room would turn up  the CPAP pressure until their apneas, hypopneas were gone, their sleep efficiency was  good, all of this was looking good. Well, they would have people and they would tell me  that usually once or twice a week, they'd have somebody that basically would get up in the  middle of the night, rip the mask off and be like, I'm done. This is stupid. I'm out of here.  And once the sleep techs had met us, they were able to give that patient a card and say,  hey, don't despair.  [0:28:56]  There are other options. Here's Dr. Spencer's card. Maybe an oral appliance could be right  for you. And the patient's like, what are you talking about, oral appliance? Never heard of  that before. Having a good relationship with sleep techs, very, very important. Now, ideally,  you're going to get to the point where you're titrating the oral appliances live in the sleep  lab. That would be amazing. I wish everyone did it that way. Most don't do it that way. But  that's something that you could do. And if you can convince your local sleep doctors to  titrate the appliances live in the sleep lab, that will make your success rate much higher.  The satisfaction of everyone's going to be higher. It's good for the sleep labs 'cause finan -  cially it's good for them. And you'll teach the sleep techs. I've never had sleep techs be  like, no way, I don't want to do that. I've heard stories of people saying, oh, yeah, the sleep  techs don't want to do that. I'm not sure that's true. I think it's usually the billing people  don't understand how to bill it or the medical doctor just thinks it's not necessary.  [0:29:57]  In my experience, the sleep techs usually think it's pretty cool. As a matter of fact, recently,  a member of Spencer Study Club, one of our business elite members, again, told a story  of he was at a meeting like this where he was with the sleep techs. They were talking  about the model of what they were doing. And one of the sleep techs raised their hand and  said, why don't we titrate the appliances live in the sleep lab? I did that where I used to  work. And he said, where did you used to work? And the sleep tech was like, in Boise. And  he said, with Cameron Kuehne and Jamison Spencer? And she's like, exactly. And that  was really cool. And that sleep tech was like, yeah, this is totally logical. We're adjusting  09/01/25   Page   of 10   19

SSC 2.0 - 405: 16 Steps to Better MD Relationships  the appliance, finding that sweet spot right there live in the sleep lab. And I believe that  that sleep lab decided, oh okay cool. We have a sleep tech that knows how to do this.  Let's go ahead and move forward and do that. That would be a cool thing if you could do  that. Again, don't hold your breath. It's not that common that dentists are doing this. But if  you can do it, it's really, really awesome.  Number 9   [0:31:04]  Number nine, get to know the manager of the sleep lab. What? Okay, so this is how we  kind of get to that titration of the appliance in the sleep lab is there's often, not always. It  depends on who owns the sleep lab. If it's owned by a hospital, I've had. Well, let me get  to my point first. The manager of the sleep lab is their role is making sure the sleep lab is  profitable. That's what I'm getting at. If you can talk to the manager of the sleep lab and  say, hey, would it be helpful? Do you have the capacity to do a lot more sleep studies? Be -  cause every patient that gets referred to us for an oral appliance, we're going to refer back  to you for titration of the oral appliance live in the sleep lab. You get to bill for another in-  person sleep study. Most of the time, in my experience, the manager of the sleep lab is  like, dang, that would be cool. That's a lot more sleep studies. And that means every per -  son that's on their books right now that's not using their CPAP anymore, that is kind of at  the end of their revenue cycle, so to speak, that they're done.  [0:32:06]  They're not making any more money on that patient. They've done everything they can do.  All of a sudden, those can be resurrected because they can reach out to them and be like,  hey, we know you aren't using your CPAP. Would you be interested in oral appliance? And  if the patient's like, yeah, sure, let's try the oral appliance, then that's another sleep study  that the lab gets. Now, the exception to this would be hospitals. That's where I was going  with that. A lot of hospitals are just like, no, we're fine. Or I remember meeting once with a  hospital sleep lab manager and us talking about expanding their lab using exactly what I  was just describing. And the manager literally said, expand the lab? I want to shrink the  lab. I want less beds. We're doing too much as it is. This is not an entrepreneurial-minded  type of person. This person was paid on salary. More work meant more work and no more  pay. He was not excited at all. Keep that in mind that not everyone's going to be super  stoked about this. But if you have a sleep lab locally that you're working with that is moti -  vated by profit, then this can be something that you talk to them about.  [0:33:13]  And that's going to be an initial conversation with the sleep doctor. He's like, hey, this is  how my mentor and I do this. And there's really good reasons to do this clinically. And I  think also this could be nice for your practice financially even 'cause it's a reason that Blue  Cross will pay for another sleep study and an in-lab sleep study, not just a home study.  Most sleep doctors will get that. And if they like the idea of, yeah, titrating this live in the  09/01/25   Page   of 11   19

SSC 2.0 - 405: 16 Steps to Better MD Relationships  sleep lab, that makes a lot of sense. Then you're like, hey, can I talk to your manager?  'Cause that's kind of more like a financial thing and a coding thing and all that stuff. And  they will usually be like, oh, yeah, yeah, let's get Steve on board here and have you guys  talk. Then it will be, “okay, Steve, here's what's going on and here's the code that's used.”  And by the way, the code is just the same CPAP titration code, just in the notes they put  oral appliance titration. As of this recording, there is no specific code for oral appliance  titration. Bottom line, get to know the manager of the sleep lab and see if you can help  them in what they do. That's the goal here. Help them by helping them and find out what  are their concerns, what are the things they're thinking about, how can you help them with  that.  Number 10   [0:34:27]  Number ten, go to local sleep society meetings and become a member. Most areas have a  sleep society. There's Idaho Sleep Society. There's Utah Sleep Society. We are members  of those things. Not only are we members, we have spoken at those meetings. In Utah,  they have Grand Rounds. Dr. Mangelson and I have both been speakers at the Grand  Rounds multiple times. In Idaho, Cameron and I have been speakers at the Sleep Society  meetings and are part of that and have also exhibited at it. We've supported them and had  a booth at those meetings. You can do the same thing. Be part of that local community.  When I was in North Carolina, I was and spoke at their meetings. Now you may be like,  yeah, Jamison, that's what you do for a living. You're a speaker. I can't do that. Well, yes,  you can. And actually in Spencer Study Club, we have presentations that I've built for you  that you can add your own letterhead stuff and your own information, but it's all really built  for you for a presentation that you could give on titration of oral appliances in the sleep lab  or other things like that ready to go.  [0:35:41]  And I find that there are these evergreen topics that are given at the Sleep Society meet -  ings, literally like, well, what is oral appliance therapy and how does it work? And is it paid  for by insurance? And does it cause TMJ problems? And you're not usually having to be in  some area of biochemistry or neurochemistry or advanced sleep medicine that you're not  comfortable with. They just want you to talk about these pieces of plastic that we give our  patients and what that's all about. Get involved. One of our Spencer Study Club members  is the president of the local Sleep Society as a dentist. He's a dentist and he's the presi -  dent of his local Sleep Society. Pretty big feather in the cap there to be president of the  Sleep Society. And it's in a rather populous urban area, so pretty big deal. Well, if you go  and you become active in this, then it's like any type of professional organization. There's  only so many people that come. And so with the leadership roles, they tend to be like, hey,  Jamison, you've been here multiple times. Would you like to be treasurer?  [0:36:54]  09/01/25   Page   of 12   19

SSC 2.0 - 405: 16 Steps to Better MD Relationships  And then you're like, oh, I'm so flattered. But really, they're just thinking, hey, here's a new  sucker. Let's get him on the leadership so we don't have to keep doing this ourselves all  the time. And then next thing you know, you're president. I would strongly encourage that.  Number 11   [0:37:08]  Number eleven, go to awake meetings. Now, these still exist, I believe. I haven't been to  an awake meeting for a while. But as you are kind of getting started in this, this can be  pretty cool. Awake meetings are support groups for people on CPAP. And like I said, these  may not be as common as they used to be back in, when I started this, almost all CPAP  was done local. And you'd have these local durable medical equipment companies, and  they would be helping people with their CPAP. And they or the hospitals would put on  these support group awake meetings. And I would go and I would speak at the awake  meetings. And I would just go sometimes just to see what's what was going on. And there  would be inevitably a nurse or nurse practitioner that was from one of the sleep doctor's  offices. And that helped you build that relationship there.  [0:38:05]  Just look for these sorts of opportunities as well. I don't remember ever getting a patient  from one of these, but I probably did. But that's not really your goal. Your goal isn't to go  there and be like, all right, all of you people that are struggling with your CPAP, did you  know that oral appliances are an option? You should all come and get an oral appliance.  While that is actually logical, 'cause that's what they're there for. People don't go to a sup -  port group because they're doing amazing. They're going there to get help from others  'cause they're struggling. And the message that I would take to that group was, can you  guess? Guess what my message would be? Was it oral appliance is superior to CPAP? Or  was it maybe you could use an oral appliance with your CPAP to help you use your CPAP?  That's right. That was my message. I wasn't going in there to tell them that CPAP sucked. I  was going in there to say, yeah, CPAP is awesome. You guys are obviously really trying to  do everything you can. Maybe we could do an oral appliance in conjunction with your  CPAP, and that'll help you be successful. That is the message you would take to an awake  group.  Number 12   [0:39:14]  Number twelve, do a great job with the patients that you treat and make certain that the  first 100 have a really good experience. Now for some of you, you're like, okay, 100 was a  long time in the rearview mirror. And for others of you, you're like 100, holy cow, that's go -  ing to take me years 'cause I'm doing like one or two a month at this point. That'd take me  three or four years to get to 100. Yeah, might, but there's a little tipping point here that as  09/01/25   Page   of 13   19

SSC 2.0 - 405: 16 Steps to Better MD Relationships  you are getting more and they're having great experiences, that's building all these rela -  tionships that we talked about. The way it tends to grow, there are exceptions to this, but  the way most practices grow is a curve like that. It's really slow at the start, and then it kind  of kicks up and it meets a point where it just starts skyrocketing. Our practice has grown  25% to 30% plus a year, almost every year. When I started in this area, my practice, I think  I bought the practice. It was doing about $300,000.  [0:40:16]  That was back in 1998. In 2025, as I'm recording this, we're on track in that same practice  that I bought in 1998 to do about $6 million in revenue. Yeah, there's things we charge a  little bit more for than we did in 1998, but frankly, a lot of our treatments aren't that much  more expensive than they were 25 years ago. And also when I bought that practice 25  years ago, we were doing crowns on people's teeth and stuff like that. We don't do any of  that anymore. But that curve, particularly for sleep, was like the first year I did sleep, I did  probably like 15, 20 appliances. And then the next year it was 35, and then the next year it  was 42. And it was just really, really slow. And now, again, last month we treated like 132  people in a single month. That tends to be how it grows. Just be patient. Make sure that  this core foundation that you're building is really, really, really, really important, and it's go -  ing to determine the speed of your growth is going to be determined on these first patients.  Make sure that they have an awesome experience.  Number 13   [0:41:26]  Always refer your patients back for follow-up and not just by referring them, but in the let -  ter. We tell our patients when they first come in that here's the pathway. We're going to get  records. We're going to fit you with an appliance. We're going to get you back for follow-  up. And as soon as you're snoring less and feeling better, we're going to send you back to  the physician that referred us here, referred you here, and then you and that physician are  going to talk about the possibility of an objective follow-up. Remember that study that you  did before? Likely going to do that again with the oral appliance to make sure that every -  thing's working okay. Now at that point, the patient might say, oh, yeah, that was awful.  That was a terrible experience. I don't want to do that again. And you say, you know what?  Yeah, I get it. It is. I've had home sleep tests myself. I've had an in-lab study myself, if  that's true. I have. And yeah, I get it. That's kind of a crazy experience. That's going to be  up to you and your doctor.  [0:42:23]  Not everybody needs to have that follow-up sleep study, but that's going to be up to you  and your doctor. In my experience, sleep doctors will virtually always get a follow-up sleep  study. Primary care doctors often won't get a follow-up sleep study. For primary care doc -  tors being all about the practicality, if the patient says, yep, snoring less, feeling better, do -  ing good, the primary care doctor might be like, all right, cool. I mean, you already gave up  09/01/25   Page   of 14   19

SSC 2.0 - 405: 16 Steps to Better MD Relationships  on CPAP, and everything else seems to be doing good, so good enough for me, and that's  it. Sleep doctors tend to want to know the objective measures, and particularly pulmonolo -  gist sleep doctors like to see that AHI get as close to zero as possible. Now, a little extra  hint here is once you get to the point where you're doing this on a regular basis, what you  might do is you'll kind of see how long it takes you to take a patient from initial screening to  so-called final follow-up, or not even final follow-up, but initial screening to ready to send  them back to the sleep doctor or sleep lab or primary care doctor.  [0:43:28]  And once you've figured it out, let's say that that's three months just for fun, you might  consider telling the sleep doctor or primary care doctor, hey, when you refer a patient, why  don't you just automatically set up a follow-up appointment with them for three months  out? That'll get me time to get them in, get them started into treatment. Probably they're  going to be doing fine at three months, and then you've already got them. You don't have  to track them down. We don't have to wait two or three months for them to find a hole in  your schedule to get them in. You just automatically do that. That's one of our main sleep  doctors in Boise. That's what they do. Every patient that is referred to us, they're already  set up with that follow-up. So these patients aren't lost to follow-up. That's really important,  and that's something that I've never had a sleep doctor be like, well, that's a stupid idea,  but that will help you get rid of this idea of like, well, I never see him back because, frankly,  if they took some responsibility there, they would just make the referral and then automati -  cally set up the follow-up appointment that would be the best.  [0:44:31]  You want to do it all, right? You would like them to set up the follow-up appointment, and  even in that office that always does that, we still tell the patient, you're going to be going  back, and then once they're ready to go back, we send a letter saying, hey, we've sent the  patient back. Do all of the stuff to make sure that that communication is received.  Number 14   [0:44:50]  Number fourteen flows directly from number 13, and that is your letters. We will typically  do an initial thank you for referring letter. We will then do one when we're ready to send  the patient back for follow-up, and then the third letter is once they've come back having  had the sleep study to say, hey, patient's doing great, and here is our long-term follow-up  schedule. Our typical patient that is referred by a sleep doctor will get three letters. A pa -  tient that you refer to the sleep doctor, you could also do three letters. That first one would  be just you've referred them there. After they've had their sleep study and stuff and an oral  appliance is considered for treatment, then you could then write a letter. It wouldn't be a  thank you for referring letter per se. It would just be saying, hey, received our common pa -  tient has come back for treatment. Thank you for the prescription of the oral appliance, and  09/01/25   Page   of 15   19

SSC 2.0 - 405: 16 Steps to Better MD Relationships  then you would go the same way. Again, examples of those letters are in your document  center.  Number 15   [0:45:51]  Now this point might seem like we already covered it 'cause I already told you to have ex -  cellent care, particularly on that first 100 people, and, of course, you're not going to stop at  100 and just be crappy care from then on. But what I mean on this point is long term.  Sleep apnea is not typically something that they just get over. There are, you will have a  few patients in your career that lose a bunch of weight and they don't have sleep apnea  anymore and that's always awesome. But the vast majority of your patients as they get  older and floppier, they're going to have worse sleep apnea. Now this is not easy. I put this  in here on being important, but just because it's important does not mean that it's easy at  all. And that is getting people back for annual follow-ups. And getting them a new appli -  ance every three to five years as their insurance will pay for it and things like that.  [0:46:43]  If you kind of do the math on this, let's say that you fit 10 patients in a month and you're  like, yeah, that's awesome. And so then the next month you've got another 10 patients  you're going to fit hopefully, but then you have those other 10 patients that you do follow-  up on, so that's 20 patients. And then that third month we hopefully fit another 10 patients,  but then we got 20 people that we're doing follow-up on. Now extrapolate that out to a year  and we've got the 10 patients from the previous year, month, like in January let's say, that  following January those 10 people are ready to come back for annual follow-up. And then  we also have that cumulative all those people that we're following up with and fitting and  stuff like that. This can get like a lot of people really quickly. Our Boise practice, we have  someone that it's basically their full-time job to track down people and get them in for an -  nual follow-ups. We don't typically even charge for annual follow-ups because we just find  it so important to be checking in on that patient, making sure their bite hasn't changed,  they're not having any problems, that their appliance is still in good shape.  [0:47:53]  And then of course the goal for this, financially for us, is that as we do a good job with that,  we're going to give them another appliance and be able to bill that insurance again. And  many of our patients have two, three, four, five appliances that have been covered by their  insurance over the years. That's kind of the financial benefit for us, but it's also just that  quality of care. Long-term follow-up, very important. And this is frankly where this becomes  crazy valuable in your practice. Let's say that you are thinking of selling your practice down  the road, as most of us will. There aren't too many practices out there where you can point  to an actual number to say, hey, in our practice we average 100 people a year come in for  repeat treatment. And we're getting on average $3,000 from the insurance. So in our prac -  tice, $300,000 a year is just repeat business. That's pretty cool. Now, I know a general  09/01/25   Page   of 16   19

SSC 2.0 - 405: 16 Steps to Better MD Relationships  dentist would have so much money from repeat hygiene, but it's not the same profit margin  even close. To have this and to build that up where it's a far bigger number than that is go -  ing to make your practice super duper valuable for the next person who comes in after  you.  Number 16   [0:49:17]  And last, number 16, be patient. This takes time to build. Trust and respect and confidence  in you is not something that you just get immediately. And also, it takes time to build and it  takes no time at all to destroy. If you do some stupid marketing and watch the marketing  section here too in level four, you can really hurt your reputation with that. If you start work -  ing with some company that's going to promise you the moon and they're going to ruin  your reputation because of having you work with home sleep testing companies that are  five states away and they're going to do everything and you don't need to work with your  local medical community, that can hurt your reputation. I've worked with many Spencer  Study Club members who have gone down those roads and have hurt their reputation and  it can be rebuilt, but it ain't easy. A lot of doctors have long memories and if they think that  you're a bit of a scumbag, even if that's not really true, they're going to tend to hold to that  opinion for a while and it's going to take you a bit to recover from that.  [0:50:25]  You're way better off building this strong foundation and taking your time and building  something you can really be proud of and something that will really be a legacy for you,  which is, I feel, what I've built in my practices and very proud of that fact. And these are  things that have extended beyond me. Even though I'm the one that built it, it's not about  Jamison Spencer anymore. It's about the Center for Sleep Apnea and TMJ. You can do  that same thing. We're nothing special that there's only us that can do this. Anybody can  do this following the principles that allow for success. Success really is a science and then  fulfillment is more of an art, but the success, a successful practice, there really is a sci -  ence, a way of doing that. And I know that from not just only my own experience, but from  working now with dozens of members of Spencer Study Club with their business through  our business lead program.  When You First Talk to a Sleep Doctor   [0:51:27]  A couple of tips when you are first talking to a sleep doctor. I put the classic book here,  'How to Win Friends and Influence People' by Dale Carnegie. I remember reading this  when I was like 12 years old. We want to help them, and as mentioned before, see if you  can figure out what they care about. And most sleep doctors, they care about their patients  being on CPAP. What can you do to help their patients use CPAP? And also, maybe they  09/01/25   Page   of 17   19

SSC 2.0 - 405: 16 Steps to Better MD Relationships  like the idea of the titrating oral appliances live in the sleep lab. What are things that you  can do with that, talking to them about things that they are going to care about? Also, fo -  cus on referral of your patients, not the other way around. It's pretty common for dentists to  go in thinking, hey, sleep doctor, you've got all these patients that can't tolerate their CPAP.  Lucky for you, there's me. You can send them to me, and I'm going to save the day by  treating them with oral appliance therapy. That's a real what's-in-it-for-you approach, and  you want to be what's-in-it-for-them. In talking to them about I can help more of your pa -  tients use CPAP, but also in, hey, how can I best refer to you? What's the method? And  hey, please remember, and this is important here, you need to explain to them often that  you are a dentist, and therefore you're referring for a consultation with the sleep doctor.  [0:53:00]  If you're going to refer directly to a sleep doctor like I do, they need to understand that this  is different. Primary care doctors, when they refer for sleep studies, it's like you and I refer -  ring for an MRI. When we refer, we don't refer for a sleep study. I've never referred anyone  in my life for a sleep study. I refer for a consultation with a sleep doctor. The sleep doctor,  now part of that is for insurance purposes. In order for the sleep lab to get paid, the docu -  mentation is that there was a face-to-face with a doctor before the sleep study. In that  face-to-face, there has to be documentation of the patient being tired, the patient having  some reason for there to be medical necessity to do this test. That's what you're doing.  You've got to get really clear on that, like, hey, how do I refer people to you? And they may  just be like, well, yeah, here, here's our referral pad, and that's what you do. Hey, I get that  is there any difference with me being a dentist? 'cause, correct me if I'm wrong, doctor, but  I think you guys need, like, the patient needs a face-to-face with a medical doctor prior to  getting the sleep study in order for the sleep study to be paid by insurance.  [0:54:06]  That's what I've been told. Is that the case here in Montana? Is that the case here in Iowa?  And then they're going to be like, yeah, I think you might be right. They'll get their insur -  ance person, whatever. Like, oh, yeah, you're right. Okay, so would it be possible I just re -  fer to you for a consultation, and then you decide if the patient gets a sleep study or not?  Oh, yeah, okay, that makes sense. Okay, let them know about your education, though. And  you get to say, as a member of Spencer Study Club, you can say something like, yeah, my  mentor and I, we've treated thousands of patients at this point. And that could be thou -  sands for me and tens of thousands for all of the members of Spencer Study Club, and  three for you, and that's all right. You're going to get there eventually, but you can lean on  our group as your level of expertise because you have access to all of that expertise. Don't  kind of go in there and undersell yourself. They're like, well, I haven't really treated very  many people,   in an unconfident way. You have because you have access to this body of  knowledge of Spencer Study Club.  [0:55:13]  If you got your boards already, you only had to have like, what, two cases to get your  boards, and that may not have given you a lot of clinical confidence, but you can get rolling  here and have the group, have our group backing you up. Let them know that. And you  09/01/25   Page   of 18   19

SSC 2.0 - 405: 16 Steps to Better MD Relationships  don't need to say, I'm a member of Spencer Study Club. They're not going to know what  that means, but you can say, yeah, my mentor and I, we've treated thousands of patients.  I'm very confident in the clinical skills that we bring to the table here. But once again,  you're going to make this initial conversation about them. What do they care about? This  portion that I'm talking about right there is almost more if they ask about it. Like I had a  doctor once who asked, I was connecting a dentist with this sleep doctor that I knew in an -  other city, and we were actually going to start seeing patients in the clinic there, in this  sleep clinic. And he's like, well, hey, Jamison, I know you're highly credentialed and expe -  rienced and everything else, but what about this dentist that is going to be in here seeing  the patients?  [0:56:16]  I'm like, well, she's going through the process and getting her boards and stuff like that.  And he's like, yeah, it's really important to me that she have her boards. All right. And I told  him, well, don't worry, I'm going to be overseeing all these cases. So it's almost the same  as me seeing the patient myself. He's like, yeah, okay, that's fine. I get that. But it is impor -  tant to me that she get her boards. All right. That's the only time ever that I've had a sleep  doctor say that. But that was important to him. That was something we then immediately  got her on track to get her boards to satisfy this concern that he had. His biggest concern  was that we were in network with insurance, actually, which we were, but he wanted her  also to get her boards. And lastly on this topic, remember, Rome wasn't built in a day, but  they were laying bricks every hour. So you are going to be building this foundation every  day. You're going to be building a little bit more and more to ultimately what you want. And  think about that quite a bit of like, what do I actually want?  [0:57:14]  What am I trying to build? Do I want to ultimately only do sleep and TMD? That might look  different than if you want to keep this as a relatively small part of your restorative practice.  The journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step. You've heard this before, this  Lao Tzu quote, and you're on that pathway already. You've already taken way more than a  single step. We're here to support you in your journey. I'm here personally. All of the other  members of Spencer Study Club are here to support you. You are not alone. And by the  way, wherever you are right now, I already was, and many of the people in Spencer Study  Club were too. Wherever you are, we've been there, so we can help you through that  process. Okay, let's shift gears now, and we're going to talk about working with durable  medical equipment companies. Now this has become maybe a little more complicated  over the years, 'cause as I mentioned earlier in this section, back when I started, DME was  all mom-and-pop stores, and they were going to people's homes, and they were treating  people, and it was pretty easy to find out who they were and to go and do different things  to connect with the DME companies. That's become a little bit harder with a lot of CPAP  being sent out just via mail. But if you're lucky, you can still find out who is doing this in  your area, and this content will be valid for you.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 19   19

