SSC 2.0 - 109: Introduction to PRF  SSC 2.0   Level 1  109: Introduction to PRF  [intro music]  Platelet-Rich Fibrin Overview   [0:00:12]  But wait, there's more. I'm going to give you a overview of platelet-rich fibrin and what  we're doing now that is new. Now, if you've been a member of Spencer Study Club for a  long time, you know I'm talking a ton about PRF now, but you know that in the initial, in the  original Spencer Study Club videos, there was no discussion of PRF because none of us  were doing this. It may have been being done somewhere, but most of the literature actu -  ally is from 2020 and beyond. So this is quite new, what you're hearing, even if you've  been a member now for years and just watching these videos. This is all new stuff. So as  of the recording of this, I've been in practice, what is it now? 27 years, I guess it is. 27  years, wow, that really makes me seem and probably look old, doesn't it? I've been doing  this a long time, and this is a tiny bit, 10% of my career has this even been something that  we've thought about. I'd like to give credit, and I try to do this every time, to Frank Henrich,  who has been a member of Spencer Study Club for years and years and years, and he's  the one that brought this to my attention.  [0:01:28]  He is a real dentist, as I like to say. He's built up quite a sleep and TMD practice in Tulsa,  Oklahoma, but he came to me, he's like, hey, Jamison, I'm doing this for dental implants  and surgeries and stuff like that. Let's kind of show this picture here. These all these differ -  ent things that platelet-rich fibrin can be used for or regenerative medicine techniques and  dentistry are being used for. And he was doing it for a bunch of stuff because he does pe -  rio surgery, and he places implants, and he does wisdom teeth extractions and all this  stuff. And he was using it for this. He's like, this is amazing. Have you ever thought about  doing this in the jaw joint? I was like, yeah. And courses that he would take, they would  kind of talk about the jaw joint, but like the last 10 minutes on day three would be like, oh,  and by the way, you can inject the jaw joint or something. So eventually he kind of talked  me into like, hey, this is pretty cool. So we started getting into it.  [0:02:27]  Now I actually, if you talk to my partners, Dr. Kuehne and Dr. Mangelson, I don't think that  they would want to practice without it. Particularly Dr. Mangelson, our Salt Lake practice is  smaller than our Boise practice, but is more TMD than our Boise practice by percentage.  Boise probably still does maybe a little bit more TMD than Salt Lake, but Salt Lake is like  70% TMD, 30% sleep. Boise is about 60, 40 sleep TMD. And this is just absolutely critical  in our practice. And the more we are doing it, the more excited about it we get, and the  09/01/25   Page   of 1   13

SSC 2.0 - 109: Introduction to PRF  more we want to do it more. So all of the stuff that I just went over with you and the differ -  ent treatments, it's getting to where we're using PRF in these cases instead of the tradi -  tional, if you will, things that we were doing before. And when you power this with or pair  this with splint therapy, then it's even more powerful, even more amazing. So how this  works, if you're not familiar yet, is we draw the patient's blood, spin it in a centrifuge, and  then you suck off the Buffy layer there. So the interface between the two layers, and then  we inject it back into them.  Before and After   [0:03:40]  It's pretty much that simple. We do typically a single injection into the joint capsule. By the  time you're seeing this, we are likely teaching courses in ultrasound guidance of the nee -  dle. You heard me talk about that earlier in the presentations here when I said I was prob -  ably one of the first ones to have this done on myself and what we learned from that. So  we will be teaching this to just make sure that you're in the joint. I think it's a good thing.  Most of us have done tons and tons of this just freehand, but to have that increased accu -  racy of ultrasound will be helpful for us and our patients and our referral sources and those  we're working with in our community. So that, I'm sure that by the time you're watching  this, those are in place. So let me just kind of show you some before and afters here. So  what you're typically going to see is a breakdown of the cortical plate and then with PRF,  that cortical plate coming back as you see here. Another case, this one had a subchondral  cyst, we call that, and little kind of a notch there on the before.  [0:04:57]  By the way, all of these are three injections done one month   apart and then after the third  injection, typically the after CBCT is taken a month after that third one. So that's kind of in  general here. Another one kind of broken down, filled in afterwards. Cortical plate pretty  much gone and then back looks completely normal on the after there. Another one little  broken down spot of the cortical plate and then back on the after. And we see this over  and over and over and over and over again. Now having said that, not all of our patients  are showing changes in the radiographic presentation. They're not showing necessarily  always improvement on the Cone Beam CT, but so far, knock on some wood here, virtually  every patient says they feel better. Like actually, as I'm recording this, every patient says  they feel better. Okay, that can't last. You would think that statistically that's super improb -  able. On the other hand, maybe it's not improbable because what this is is, and I'll go more  to this later, there'll be a whole thing on PRF, but it's taking your own healing factors, con -  centrating them, and putting it back into you. There's nothing else in there. There's not  stem cells, exosomes, there's nothing in the test tube like there is with platelet-rich plasma,  PRP, where there's an anticoagulant in the test tube, that that is unnatural.  [0:06:25]  09/01/25   Page   of 2   13

SSC 2.0 - 109: Introduction to PRF  So all of this is just your stuff back in you, and maybe that does make sense that every -  body feels better, at least temporarily, but that's what we're seeing. Okay, so this is a case  from Dr. Brian Briesmeister, who's a member of Spencer Study Club. So where the arrow  is pointing, there's a hole in the disc. So there, the dark black in the back and then the dark  black in the front, that's the disc, and then in between those two dark black sections is a  not dark black section, and that is where there's a tear or a hole in the disc. Brian thought  that this patient had a non-reducing displacement, that's why he got the MRI. She had re -  stricted range of motion, pain in the jaw joint, deflected, and then they got the MRI. It's like,  oh no, actually the disc is not displaced, but hey, there's a hole in it, and she had pain, so  he thought, well, let's try PRF. After doing just two injections, her pain was significantly bet -  ter, and she's like I don't know that I want a third injection, but I would like an MRI to see if  it's done anything.  [0:07:29]  So he sends her back for another MRI, and what you're seeing here now on both of these,  but it's real obvious on this one, is that solid black all the way through, solid black all the  way through, showing that the disc had repaired itself. Blow my mind when he first showed  me this. So this is the pretreatment MRI, suspicion of incomplete tear within the posterior  horn of the meniscus. Then, and let's see, let's look at the dates on that. So that's 4-25-'23,  this is 10-18-'23, so what is six months in between the pre and the post? And going down  here a little bit, intermediate signal intensity is now seen within the normally positioned  right articular disc, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. Suggestion of partial thickness tearing is  was seen on previous MRI, likely representing interval granulation tissue scar suggestive  of ongoing healing. That blew my mind. So this is, as far as I know, there are probably oth -  ers out there, but for our little group anyway, this is the first documented disc being healed  with two PRF injections. Pretty neat stuff. This is another one of our Spencer Study Club  members, Dr. Tanya Kushner.  [0:08:49]  So patient comes in with relatively normal TMJ complaints of pain and dysfunction. Tanya  treated her with what we would call traditional splint therapy. Patient did significantly or got  significantly better, did well. Tanya weaned her off the splint that she was wearing during  the day. She continued to wear nighttime appliance. And then after a while, the patient  came back saying, hey, this hurts again. So Tanya got another film. So here we are May  22, February of 23. She sees this. Okay, that is massive degeneration of the condyforbidle.  And again, patient had felt better, was getting worse again. Now, historically, this probably  is a patient that you're sending to surgery and they're going to smooth things out or maybe  even, heaven, replace the condyle. Tanya thought, well, can't hurt. Let's do some PRF and  see what happens. So she does PRF and this is what happens as in the condyle fills in. A  year later, she gets the patient back in to take one more Cone Beam CT. Actually, Tanya  said she's like, was a little nervous when she took this follow-up CT because we had al -  ready shown this case to people and we were really excited about it.  [0:10:13]  09/01/25   Page   of 3   13

SSC 2.0 - 109: Introduction to PRF  And she's like, gosh, you know, I hope that's hung in there and that it's done well. And then  this was 2010-24, one year later. That cortical plate is pretty much back to normal. That is  a normal looking condyle. To put that all on one slide to kind of give you what that looks  like, unbelievable. Again, never in the history of treating TMJ problems have we had such  an ability to help the body heal itself. So, so, so amazing. And Kevin had a patient come  into him. This is relatively recent as I'm recording this here. 41 year old woman. She flew  in from Colorado. She'd been seen by a ton of different people, treated by a ton of different  people. She reported when she saw him that her pain was a six to eight on a zero to 10  scale. Remember in our office, 10 is being burned alive. So that's pretty bad pain. She'd  had splint therapy. She was currently in Invisalign for her jaw pain. I think that's stupid, but  whatever. We'll talk about that more in level three. But you know, whoever was treating her  thought it was about their, you know, her canine guidance being off slightly. And that's why  she was having all this pain.  [0:11:25]  She goes to Mayo Clinic. They get a Conebeam CT and here's what they see. So again, I  don't know if the person who put her in Invisalign had x-rays or not, had a pano, because  you would have thought that they would have seen these joints too and been like, dang,  you know, maybe this isn't due to you not being able to hold shim stock between, you  know, your upper and lower molars or something. These are nasty joints. These are some  of the worst joints I've ever seen and you got like the little pieces falling off and just broken  down. This is bad news. Then you also have bone where there isn't supposed to be bone.  So in the fossa, the fossa was reacting to this trauma by putting down extra bone. So  when Kevin decided to do PRF on this patient, he was pretty nervous and rightfully so. He  was thinking, well, gosh, what if I put in the PRF and where the bone is not supposed to  be, it stimulates that growth. And maybe it, you know, maybe it does things that I'm not ex -  pecting. However, she had already been told that the next step was joint replacement  surgery.  [0:12:33]  So what does she have to lose? Nothing. And by the way, when someone gets joint re -  placement surgery, what do they typically not have anymore? Yeah, they don't have a  condyle. They don't have a disc. They don't have that stuff. But what muscle is not able to  work anymore? If you said to yourself, lateral pterygoid, you are correct. So the lateral  pterygoid normally fits, remember, to the condyle into the disc. Well, there is no condyle.  There is no disc. So there is no lateral pterygoid anymore. What does the lateral pterygoid  do? Well, moves our jaw lateral, but it also protrudes our jaw. So these patients, all of our  patients that are able to bring their jaw forward to protect their airway, which will be the  next stuff, if you watch these videos, you know, sequentially, that's going to be the next  stuff we talk about is the airway stuff. They can't do it. Okay, so I've had patients with bilat -  eral joint replacement, and it's awful. Their sleep apnea tends to be awful, and there's  nothing their body can do about it because that muscle that protrudes our jaw is not there  to protrude their jaw anymore.  [0:13:39]  09/01/25   Page   of 4   13

SSC 2.0 - 109: Introduction to PRF  So this was going to be her fate. The reason she found Kevin was she didn't want to pay  or couldn't pay over $100,000 out of pocket is what she was told this was going to cost. So  she's like, well, what the heck, I'll fly to Salt Lake and see if they can help. So he gives her  the PRF injections, and here's what happened. After the first two PRF injections, she quot -  ed some improvement. Now, she had not reported improvement with other treatments. So  this was a step in the right direction. At the third PRF injection, he added a splint, a lower  what's called a rescue splint, so something to kind of take pressure off the jaw joint. He  hadn't done the splint earlier because of this travel, this distance. And sometimes it's, well,  not sometimes, it's always hard to manage somebody with an orthotic when they're not in  your area, right? When they got to get on a plane to come to you, that's kind of a hassle.  So he was trying to treat her without the orthotic. He adds the orthotic at the third PRF in -  jection, and then she reported being pain-free. Pain-free, zero pain.  [0:14:49]  He gets her back, does a follow-up series of x-rays. These were taken 12 weeks after the  third PRF injection, and we'll put up the befores to kind of compare. So much to his satis -  faction and happiness, the area where there seemed to be extra bone growing, no more  extra bone had grown. It even started to smooth out, and the condyle itself had not only  not broken down further, but also had started to fill in, smoothing out that condyle. Most  importantly, the patient is pain-free. Most, most importantly, she is not having her joints re -  placed anymore. Pretty exciting. I really believe that open joint procedures, joint replace -  ment surgeries, man, I hope I live to see that that is just something we talk about, some -  thing we used to do. I hope that I live to see that, and it'll be because of people like you  that I will live to see that, because I really believe you can go into the study club archives  and the newsletters, and there was one newsletter that I wrote in 2024 that the title of it is,  I am to blame that joint replacement surgery still exists.  [0:16:06]  And what I meant by that is, I haven't taught enough dentists like you to know that there's  options. If you saw a patient like this, you got cone beam CTs, you saw thrash joints like  this, you're sent into a surgeon. The surgeons aren't bad. The surgeons are good people.  The surgeons are trying to help. That's the tool they have is surgery. Now you have a tool  non-surgical that can do better than they could do surgically. In my experience, when oral  surgeons are exposed to things like this, they stop doing surgery because they know that  non-surgical is better, that surgery is the last hope for the patient. And once a person has  gone down a surgical road, that's their road. You don't do conservative care after joint re -  placement, for example. So they say, well, all right, let's try everything you can do first, and  then we can do surgery if we have to. In the Salt Lake area, there was the person who we  took the practice over from. He was a little bit more pro-surgery than I am, and I'm quite  anti-surgery, as you can tell. Again, not anti-surgeon, just anti-people going to get surgery.  [0:17:13]  And there was a surgeon that this previous doctor was working with, and he's amazing.  He's fantastic. Super nice guy. They always are. And that's not hyperbole. Like, I've never  met one of these surgeons. It's not super cool, super nice, trying to do what's right by the  09/01/25   Page   of 5   13

SSC 2.0 - 109: Introduction to PRF  patient. That's their whole goal. And we told this surgeon what we do, which was a little  different than the previous doctor. So we told this surgeon what we're doing. And with un -  locking procedures at the time, we were just starting to learn about PRF and stuff at the  time. But we were doing unlocking procedures to get people back on the disc, stuff like  that. And then kind of a miracle happened, and that is his wife developed a non-reducing  disc displacement. Wow. And he brought her to Kevin. That's pretty amazing. He didn't get  her in and do an arthrocentesis, which is what he normally would have done with these  folks. And it was his wife. He wanted to treat her. Even though arthrocentesis isn't a big  surgery, he just wanted to see, well, let's see what this guy could do. So lucky for us, Kevin  was successful, got her back on the disc.  [0:18:20]  And since that point, this surgeon will not see a patient for a TMJ problem unless they've  seen Kevin first. You can do the same thing. You start getting these under your belt. You  start sharing these cases with your local dental society, with your local surgeons. And I  think that you will be the reason that someone doesn't get open joint surgery, someone  doesn't get joint replacement surgery. And that'll make me super duper happy. So you get  the training on how to do this. If you haven't already, make that your highest priority is to  get this training. And I'll talk a little bit about some of the literature on this, but later I'll talk  more about it. But I just want to give you a sneak preview of why I think this is so important  for you to get this training as soon as you can. So let's look at a little bit of the literature.  And like I said, there's going to be a different section on this in the level three where we'll  go more in depth, but just want to share some of this right now as you're kind of getting  started in this and reinforce to you that I strongly encourage you to learn how to do this as  fast as possible if you don't know already.  Reducing Disc Displacement   [0:19:25]  [video playback]  So this study, 2022, pretty cool. So they had 22 patients with one-sided clicking and they  injected one milliliter of PRF. This is, by the way, as you'll see in a second, there aren't a  lot of studies with PRF. More studies are with PRP because it's been around longer, but  we believe that PRF works better. The main difference between PRF and PRP, PRP has  an anticoagulant in the tubes. PRF does not. Okay, so back to the study here. They were  individually injected with one milliliter of PRF twice, one week apart into the superior joint  space of the TMJ. Data were recorded and evaluated by the health chemo index. This was  conducted three times, then results. The clicking disappeared entirely in 14 out of 20 pa -  tients after one week of getting the first injection. So when they showed up in week two for  the second injection, 14 had already said, yep, I'm not clicking anymore. Then, and in all  patients after one week of getting the second injection, 20 patients, all unilateral click, all  stopped clicking after the second injection. Then, continuing that sentence, and returned  09/01/25   Page   of 6   13

SSC 2.0 - 109: Introduction to PRF  the clicking to two of them after a six month, yeah, actually, that's reading exactly, after, it  should say after six months since the first injection.  [0:20:52]  So out of 20 people, they all get the clicking to go away. Two, it returns within six months.  Now, back to kind of our anatomy discussion and popping and clicking. I get a little con -  cerned with studies like this because if you think about it, and I had the little video playing  there, let's see if we can get that to play some more.  [video playback]  So if they were clicking, click, what would I have to do? I'd have to stop them right about  there to be on the disc, right? So if PRF kept them on the disc all the time, what would you  expect to happen? Let me pause, And, think about that. What happened right there where  I just stopped that video? What is not happening? Maybe a better way to say it. What  would you expect to change? Did you say their occlusion? That's right. So if that patient  went from reducing displacement, so here, pop off the disc on their teeth, click on the disc,  off their teeth, off their teeth, off their teeth, off their teeth, click on their teeth. So if the PRF  alone, and it doesn't say anything here about splinter therapy or anything like that, if the  PRF alone caused the disc to be reduced, you'd kind of expect them to have their bite be a  little off and that's not mentioned in the study. So just be aware of that. Sometimes I take  these things with a grain of salt because unfortunately it's sad to me, but there's a lot of  misunderstanding on how, frankly, how the jaw joint works. Okay, but we'll take that as a  positive.  More Reducing Disc Displacements   [0:22:46]  [video playback]  Okay, here's another one. More reducing displacements. I'll stop that video here. You don't  need to watch that over again. We'll stop it in a good spot there. All right, so this study, 20  patients for a total of 32 joints. So in other words, in 20 patients you'd have 40 joints. 32 of  the total of 40 joints had a reducing disc displacement. They split them into two groups.  One group received PRP injection, so that's with the anticoagulant in the test tube, and the  other group received hydrocortisone with local anesthetic with arthroscopy. So they put a  scope in their joint and kind of, I don't know if they cleaned it out completely, but hydrocor -  tisone injection with local anesthetic. Both patients and operator were blinded to the con -  tents of injections. I would still think though that they might recognize if they did  arthroscopy, they would recognize that. The patients were assessed for pain, maximum  interstitial opening, and TMJ sound.  [0:23:48]  Results. In the group of PRP injection, pain was markedly reduced than the group of hy -  drocortisone with local anesthetic. So PRP wins on the pain versus hydrocortisone. Mouth  opening was increased similarly in both groups, and TMJ sound was experienced lesser in  patients who received PRP. Okay, one more time. Group in PRP, way less pain, similar  09/01/25   Page   of 7   13

SSC 2.0 - 109: Introduction to PRF  opening, less sounds. Okay, so I believe that in this case that the disc would have been in  a better position, like with the previous study, and one of the reasons that their range of  motion improved was because that disc position improved versus the other group where  the disc position almost for sure did not improve. They were just pushing it farther out of  place. Conclusion, injections of PRP were more effective in reducing the symptoms as  compared to hydrocortisone with local anesthetics. Frankly, that study alone, 2018, reason  to not do hydrocortisone. So this is one that I would pull out, have this ready to take to  your oral surgeon colleagues and say, hey, you know, what do you think of this study back  in 2018 that showed that PRP was superior to hydrocortisone? All right, next. In this study,  they were looking at pain.  TMJ Pain - Classification of Internal Derangement   [0:25:10]  Here we have the Wilkes classification of internal derangement. Some of you may be fa -  miliar with that if you did any study with the Pankey group or some other kind of schools,  occlusion type of schools around the country. So 48 TMJs and 37 patients, painful internal  derangement, Wilkes 1 through 4. So they could have been anywhere from early reducing  displacement to non-reducing displacement with crepitus, so basically DJD on stage 5. Pa -  tients were injected with 1.5 to 2 cc's of PRF, another PRF study, within the superior joint  space at two week intervals this time. Pain and subjective dysfunction were recorded and  they did some statistical analysis. Results, 33 of the 48 TMJs showed significant reduction  in pain at eight weeks and at three, six, and 12 months. Fantastic. So 69% of the patients,  significant reduction in pain, quick, and then that stayed at three, six, and 12 months. 15 of  the 48 TMJs, 31%, did not improve, non-responders. Interesting. The best responders to  liquid PRF injections were internal derangement stage Wilkes 4 and 5. Okay, let's go over  there to our definitions there.  [0:26:37]  Stage 4, non-reducing displacement, chronic increasing functional disturbance, and stage  5, non-reducing   displacement, chronic with osteoarthritis, crepitus, scraping, graining,  grinding symptoms, pain, restricted motion, difficult function. Okay, so that's in all the kind  of DJD stuff. So interesting that the best responders were the ones with the worst joints.  Kind of makes sense because they're still having pain at that point and so giving them that  PRF reduced the pain significantly. Said that 4 and 5, and check that out, so 100% of  those with the so-called worst Wilkes classification had the best response. Okay, compar -  ing that to Wilkes 1, 0%, so the whoever had the Wilkes 1, they didn't do well according to  their report. 2, 47%, and 3, 33%. Okay, so we see that this is effective but that kind of  makes sense because if they're looking at pain and dysfunction, those with the least pain,  so stage 1, they don't have pain. So no pain or limitation, they just have a click. So it's not  terribly surprising that those people would be like, yeah, it didn't seem to help that much.  09/01/25   Page   of 8   13

SSC 2.0 - 109: Introduction to PRF  Well, they didn't have much of a problem in the first place. Okay, continuing, a non-signifi -  cant but notable decrease in dysfunction was found.  [0:28:00]  Okay, so cool, non-significant,   so that means that it didn't rise to the level of significance,  but there was a decrease in dysfunction or rather there was an increase in function. Con -  clusion, preliminary findings support the liquid PRF exerts long-term interesting analgesic  effects in most patients with painful TMJD or TMJ internal derangements. That word anal -  gesic is the interesting part to me. So in other words, pain is better with PRF injections.  Now, in our experience, not all patients show those dramatic changes with their cone  beam CT that I showed you before, but pain so far, as I mentioned earlier, they're all get -  ting better with their pain.  PRP + Splint Therapy   [0:28:44]  All right, now what if we combine the power of platelet-rich plasma or fibrin with splint ther -  apy? Well, we would think that that would be better. So the analogy I use with my patients  on this is that this is like crutches. So if we were to give you a shot in your knee, we might  give you crutches to take pressure off of your knee for a while and let the good stuff hap -  pen without having that bearing weight and stuff like that. So in this study, 31 patients, TMJ  osteoarthritis, who were treated with splints combined with platelet-rich plasma.  [0:29:15]  January to June, visual analog scores were taken. Results, splint plus PRP treatment was  successful in 31 patients. So note how many patients were in the study? 31. So in other  words, every patient in the study was successful. Mean pretreatment visual analog scale  score was 6.1, so that's 0 to 10. So averaging them, they were 6.1, and the mean visual  analog scale score six months post-treatment was 4.1. Now that doesn't seem like, whoa,  that doesn't seem like that big of a deal. It kind of is. If you put yourself in that situation of,  particularly if you do the 0 to 10 the way I've encouraged you to do, 0 is nothing, 10 is be -  ing burned alive. You get over 5, that's pretty bad. You get under 5 and you're like, okay,  this is something that still isn't great, but I can kind of deal with it. Post-treatment visual  analog scale scores were significantly lower than the preoperative visual analog scale  score. Mean pretreatment maximum comfortable mouth opening is 27.6. That's pretty low,  huh? So again, this is an average or a mean, so we know that there's some outliers on this  that probably screw this up, but that went to 34.8, a 7 millimeter increase, that’s a pretty  big deal.  [0:30:39]  Conclusion, splint plus PRP is an effective treatment for temporal meningeal joint os -  teoarthritis. Now there'd be bunches of studies out there that would show splint therapy  probably helps people similarly, but not, it's dang rare that you would have 100% of pa -  tients report improvement. Okay, that's, you know, those are like dental, dentist stats of like  09/01/25   Page   of 9   13

SSC 2.0 - 109: Introduction to PRF  what percentage of your patients do well after you do a filling or something like that. In the  TMD world, we're not really used to that. I've said for years that 80% of our patients get  80% better. Now with this tool, we're starting to see significantly more success or higher  success rates.  Trigger Points   [0:31:23]  All right, what about the trigger points and stuff that we talked about briefly? What would  PRP, PRF do with this? So this study, 50 adult patients participated in the study, randomly  divided into two groups. First group received one millimeter lidocaine injections to the trig -  ger point, like I showed before, although they injected a whole milliliter. Like I told you, it's  more about the technique of hitting the trigger point than it is about injecting stuff, but this  study, they thought it was about injecting stuff, so they injected one cc of lidocaine.   Second  group of patients received one milliliter of PRF, and the patient's pain was then measured.  Who did better? Okay, statistically significant difference of pain levels before the procedure  and four weeks after was found in both groups. There was no statistical significant differ -  ence between groups in pain levels before the procedure and two weeks after it. However,  statistically significant difference was noticed four weeks after the procedure. Four weeks  after the procedure, patient's average pain in the lidocaine group was 3.4 on the visual  analog scale, and it was 0.9 in the PRGF group. So again, no real huge difference before.  Four weeks after the procedure, 3.4 on the visual analog scale for the lidocaine group, 0.9,  less than one in the PRGF group, meaning, and by the way, PRGF stands for platelet-rich  growth factor group. So those, what that means when you see a 0.9 and there's basically  25 people in there, that means there was a lot of zeros. There was a lot of people in that  group that had no pain at all.  [0:33:01]  Conclusions, platelet-rich growth factor injections in masseter muscle effective by myofas -  cial pain syndrome or an effective treatment method.   Platelet-rich growth factor injections  more effectively relief myofascial pain. My gosh, there's a lot of typos in these. Pain in  masseter muscle than lidocaine injections. Now, once again, remember, it's more about  that local twitch response. Nevertheless, if you were to drop some medication there, I  would rather drop, it's not a medication, but I'd rather drop platelet-rich fibrin or platelet-rich  growth factor than I would lidocaine.  Platelet-Rich Plasma vs Dry Needling   [0:33:39]  So in this study from 2022, they compared using platelet-rich plasma and dry needling.  Remember my talking about dry needling, that term that physical therapists use. So go  ahead and reading here. Randomized controlled trial included 30 clinically confirmed pa -  09/01/25   Page   of 10   13

SSC 2.0 - 109: Introduction to PRF  tients of myofascial or cases of myofascial trigger points in the masseter muscle randomly  and equally assigned to either PRP or dry needling. So 15 in each group. Both groups  were evaluated for pain with a visual analog scale, range of functional movements, need  for pain medication, patient satisfaction, and sleep. Also with a visual analog scale at  baseline and two weeks, one month, and three month follow-ups, visual analog scale pain  and Likert score were also obtained at six month intervals. I haven't mentioned this, so  visual analog scale, in case you're not familiar with this.  [0:34:32]  So you got the like zero to 10, right? It depends on the research, but oftentimes to make it  a true visual analog scale, it'll be like 100 millimeters wide. And it will say zero on one side,  and it will say 10 on the other side, and then there's usually nothing in between those two.  And then the patient is to mark between 0 is no pain, 10 is the worst you can imagine, or 0  usually for sleep would be terrible, and 10 would be awesome. And then they mark some -  where along that line, and then the researcher takes a ruler, 100 millimeter ruler, and sticks  it on the visual analog scale, and that's how they get their number. Okay, so wherever they  put the strict mark, then that might be 67 millimeters on the 100 millimeter scale, and then  that would be a 6.7 on the visual analog scale. Okay, not exactly positive how they did it  here, but that is a way to do that, rather than having the smiley face and the frowny faces  and all that kind of stuff. Okay, results. Use of PRP solution in the master trigger points in  myofascial pain syndrome patients had a better effect on pain and patient satisfaction  compared to dry needling.  [0:35:52]  Conclusion, PRP appears to be more effective treatment modality compared to dry  needling. So once again, PRP for the win. So that's kind of an overview of using PRP,  PRF, splint therapy, and pain, disc displacements, stuff like that. Again, more on this later.  Hopefully you've already seen enough to be stoked out of your mind about this. If you got  into Spencer Study Club because you're more interested in dental sleep medicine, which  is very common, I like to say that dental sleep medicine is the gateway drug into TMD. I  kind of hook you in on the sleep stuff, and then I help you realize that actually TMD is real -  ly cool. And if you diagnose people, you get them better. And now with PRF, you get them  better even faster and more predictably and with less costs. And you're not worrying about  having to do ortho and crown their teeth and stuff like that the way I teach it as well. So I  hope that you start helping people with TMJ problems.  TMD Recap   [0:37:01]  But let me recap this section here and bring this to a conclusion. Once again, retrodiscitis,  think tongue depressor test, aqualizer and Advil. Trismus, think severely reduced range of  motion after nerve block, Medral dose pack and physical therapy or what else could you  do? Heck yeah, PRF right in the same spot. So you would do PRF in the IA block. You  09/01/25   Page   of 11   13

SSC 2.0 - 109: Introduction to PRF  would give them another IA block just like you did before. And if you're hitting the medial  pterygoid, you'd be like, okay, good. I'm pretty sure that's what happened before. And you  would inject some PRF into that medial pterygoid on purpose. So that's what I would do if  one of my family members came home and had trismus after a dental procedure. I would  not put them on the Medral dose pack. I would do PRF and then still give them physical  therapy to stretch that thing out. Non-reducing displacement, 26 millimeter range of motion  without clicking with a history of recent clicking, unlocking procedure or refer ASAP. I'll  cover this more in level three, but to say this right now, as we're recording this, we don't  think it's a great idea to unlock with PRF. We believe it's better to unlock with local anes -  thetic. I'll cover that more later, but this is perhaps a exception to the rule of PRF is awe -  some all the time. Our thought process currently on this is that if we do PRF for an unlock -  ing procedure in the jaw joint and we aren't able to get the patient on the disc, then we're  creating a healing process with all the awesome stuff there with the disc out of place.  [0:38:46]  And maybe that might make it actually harder to get the patient back on the disc once  we've kind of started that healing process. Also PRF doesn't make you numb, whereas lo -  cal anesthetic does. That numbness with an unlocking procedure we believe is positive.  The patient's usually pretty freaked out, and it hurts for them to move their jaw in extreme  motions and sometimes we need to open them pretty big to get them to pop back on that  disc. So right now, as recording this, we believe that local anesthetic, Carbocaine specifi -  cally, is the best for unlocking procedures. That may change. If it does, you'll know be -  cause we will make sure that everybody understands the protocol, but as I'm recording this  right now, this is the best we believe. Get them on the disc and then do PRF. So Dr. Man -  gelson, who's doing a ton of this, if he successfully gets the person on the disc, he'll usual -  ly bring them back very quickly to do PRF and that will hopefully help them stay on the disc  even better. All right, that's non-reducing displacement.  [0:39:56]  Myofascial trigger points. We're going to have tender points in the muscle, give rise to  characteristic referred pain patterns, trigger point injections and/or physical therapy, and of  course, what we would do our trigger point injection with nowadays, we would do it with  PRF. So all of these PRF whenever indicated, the one exception to the rule is use local  anesthetic to get them back on the disc, but I would not hesitate to use PRF with the  odiscitis, I would certainly do it with trismus, I would certainly do it with myofascial trigger  points, the only one would be your disc displacement patient that is a non-reducing disc  displacement, you've confirmed that with an MRI, you know what you're dealing with, I  would try to get them back on the disc and then as fast as you can do PRF as part of your  therapy to help keep them on the disc. Okay, that's it for your initial review of anatomy and  kind of basic TMD stuff and basic diagnoses of things that you're going to see, and even  though it's basic, this stuff here that we just went over is a huge part of this. If you can real -  ly get this anatomy down, if you can really get these basic diagnoses down, this is going to  be really where you live.  09/01/25   Page   of 12   13

SSC 2.0 - 109: Introduction to PRF  [0:41:01]  This is a Pareto principle of the 80-20 rule, so 80% of the patients you're going to see that  have jaw problems are going to be explained by this 20% that we're going over right now.  Really make this your own, really understand this, and I promise you will be in the top 1%  of dentists worldwide if you just understand things like what a reducing disc-displacement  is, what's going on, what retrodiscal tissue is, what a retrodiscitis is. If you understand  these things, you're in the top 1% and then if you want to be in the top 0.1%, you start  treating it, doing unlocking procedures, doing PRF, that's going to put you in the highest  echelon of dentists literally in the world treating these and your success rates are going to  show that. You're going to have far more success than anyone else around you with doing  this. People are going to be coming to you. Now, right now you're like, okay, I bet I don't  want that Jamison. Maybe as you start doing it and you see the joy that you're able to  bring to people's lives with getting them out of pain, it's pretty cool. Getting people out of  pain is pretty cool.  [0:42:04]  Getting people to sleep better, very cool, too. Getting people out of pain, pretty darn cool,  and you're going to be able to do that. Okay, we started this whole section with the anato -  my and all that stuff with patients being nuts, TMJ patients being nuts, not understanding  their symptoms and I hope after this section, I hope after you kind of really brought this into  yourself that you will be able to stun your patients as being someone that understands  now. You make this your own, and you will be stunning your patients as well as your local  colleagues, your medical colleagues, frankly, everyone around you. You are stunning. You  are amazing. Okay, I will see you on the next video.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 13   13

