SSC 2.0 - 303: Initial Evaluation Part 2  SSC 2.0   Level 3  303: Initial Evaluation Part 2  [intro music]  Initial Examination - Palpation   [0:00:12]  Alright, then muscle palpation. Now, back to this kind of T1, T2 thing. On an initial exami -  nation, you might just kind of palpate some muscles very quickly. You might not. You might  actually just do. So typical in our practice on initial evaluation would be the range of mo -  tion. Okay, the range of motion stuff. Spray and stretch. And their history, and that's it. And  not even their OPQRST. It would just be more, what's your problem? You know, tell me  what's going on. Stuff like that. And then I'll get to the bite thing in just a minute, too, 'cause  that's something else we would do on initial evaluation to show them we can help them by  actually helping them. The longer history with the OPQRST and the palpation of all the  muscles would be, and even more measurements. So on the measurements of lateral ex -  cursions and protrusion and stuff like that, we might put that into more of a comprehensive  examination. By the way, this is all in your document center. So the initial evaluation stuff  with kind of the basic stuff and then the comprehensive examination stuff are different pa -  perwork, different forms. And we also ask the patient more questions on the comprehen -  sive exam than we do on the initial exam.  [0:01:24]  Okay, so that's, you could set that up however you want, but that's what I would recom -  mend is that initial and then, hey, let's get some records, some objective measures, and  then bring you back in for our longer examination. As you're getting started in TMD2, I  would encourage you to block your schedule for stuff like this. So you would have like, hey,  you know what, Thursday afternoons, that's my TMD and or my TMD and sleep time. And  that's when I put those people where I'm kind of learning in this. And you tell your staff, it's  like, hey, this is when I do this. And then if there aren't patients there because there  haven't been, whatever, to put in that spot, ideally, you would use that time to market, to  contact possible referral sources, stuff like that, or learn. Watch these videos, read some  literature, practice some stuff, do things with your staff, something like the spray and  stretch, the examination, do things like that to get yourself ready to go when you do start  having patients. And then after a while, you'll kind of fit it where you can, or someday  maybe you'll even only do sleep in TMD, it'll be your full-time job.   But at first, it's a great  idea to, rather than you've got hygiene check, crown prep, TMJ patient, and then crown  prep. And it's like, oh my gosh, it's 'cause it's a very different flow if you haven't figured that  out yet. It's completely different to go from crown prep to, all right, now let me sit down and  09 /01/25   Page   of 1   12

SSC 2.0 - 303: Initial Evaluation Part 2  ask you about your problem and go into more mental space here than a physical space of  figuring out what's going on.  [0:03:05]  All right, palpations. Slow, okay, so you're not gonna palpate fast, you need to palpate  slow. I palpate bilaterally, and partly that's 'cause you need to squeeze, right? So if you just  push unilaterally, you're gonna push across. So if you do do it unilaterally, which is okay,  I'm okay with that, you would stabilize their head and then palpate on the other side. Okay,  normally it's fine to palpate bilaterally and just kind of go along. The patient has already at  this point done the point with one finger and stuff, so they're gonna point you in the area to  where it hurts the most. However, it's gonna be super duper common for them to say it  hurts over my jaw joint or it hurts here in my jaw or whatever, and then you're palpating  and they're like, ooh, ow, that kind of hurts.  In Paperwork   [0:03:52]  Now in the paperwork, you're gonna see zero, it's nothing, to three. This is based on you,  okay? So we can't say, so yeah, Jamison had a patient and they had a two on the palpa -  tion of the temporalis. What does that mean to you, Jamison? And my comeback would be  kind of like, well, what's it mean to you? 'Cause you have quantified and calibrated what  that means to you in your hands, all right? So zero, that's gonna be the same for all of us,  which is nothing. And for me, one is a person's like, ah, that's a little uncomfortable. Two is  like, yeah, that kind of hurts. Three is what's called a jump sign. So three is they would pull  away from you, okay? You push and like, ow, okay, that's a three. That would be kind of  severe, would be a jump sign. So we palpate slow and methodical. Now I'm taking my fin -  gers, can't see that necessarily, I'm taking my fingers off and then back on, off. Okay, I'm  doing that, palpations. Over the jaw joints, okay, kind of push on the sides.  [0:05:00]  You can have them open a little bit, push. Masseters, you could do sternocleidomastoid.  Neck, I'll just tend to push. Trapezius, we'll push on those muscles. Okay, that one I will  tend to do one side at a time. And if you find a spot where they're like, ooh, ow, yeah, that  kind of hurts, then hold it and then say, okay, does that go anywhere or is it just where my  finger is? Okay, that's the phrase I use. Does that go anywhere or is it just where my finger  is? And then they'll think and they'll be like, ah, it kind of goes up the side of my head.  Okay, that's that trigger point, myofascial pain type of stuff. That's as far as I go. I don't go  below here. People have in the past. I choose not to. But trapezius I will get. I don't usually  need to move their clothing out of the way or stuff like that. We'll talk about that more in  injections outside the deep, dark hole and how to handle that. But you palpate and, again,  just be smart on how you do that as you get much below the neck and you're getting into  shaky ground there for you as a dentist, okay? So we tend to keep it from here up, and  that we do in our practice on the comprehensive examination.  09 /01/25   Page   of 2   12

SSC 2.0 - 303: Initial Evaluation Part 2  [0:06:17]  Now, you may remember, maybe talking about this a little bit in level one, but something  that you will not hear Jamison Spencer talk about a lot, and you'd have to be pretty much  my age or older to even care about this, but there's a lot of people out there who went to  Pankey or Dawson. I've never heard Kois talk about this that much, Spear. But there's  some of the schools of thought out there that have taught this over the years, and that is  lateral pterygoid, and that was a big deal there for 30 years ago. Was all about the lateral  pterygoid, and so they would palpate the lateral pterygoid, and they thought, really, the lat -  eral pterygoid was the reason people were having bite problems and bite changes and  stuff like that. There's still a lot of people in our field that think that it's the lateral pterygoid,  even with bite changes for sleep appliances, and I don't think it is at all, and I'll give you  the why I think that in just a second.  Lateral Pterygoid   [0:07:15]  However, if you think you can palpate the lateral pterygoid, you are probably wrong. So the  lateral pterygoid, to come down to this picture here, is up there attached to the condyle,  right? So it's way the flip up there. Note that on the teeth on that picture, on that drawing,  there's third molars. So you would have to go back through the third molars, way up there  and back. That is a long way, and you would have the buccinator in that area, the superior  pharyngeal constrictor coming together. You'd have a lot of tissues that you would be go -  ing through in order to get to the lateral pterygoid. Can you palpate the lateral pterygoid?  You can, and here is the research article that proves that, and here is a picture from said  article. So if you want to read that you can do this, here's the proof. Now look how far this  doctor's hand is up this guy's mouth, and clearly the main reason I'm showing you this pic -  ture is, look at the poor guy's face. So if this was you, and they were palpating your lateral  pterygoid, would you maybe say, yeah, ow, that hurts? Okay, now let me use an example.  [0:08:31]  What if I palpate your intercostal muscles, your inter-rib muscles, from the inside? Okay,  so I'm going to wrap my fingers around your rib cage and try to get in there to get the in -  tercostals from the inside. Is it possible that that might be a little tender? Yeah, I think  that'd be a little tender, huh? Would be on me. Does that mean anything at all? Of course  not. We're going someplace that it is excruciating to get there. Here's my point. I think  that's why so many people 20, 30 years ago, and again today, if they're old enough that  that was their foundational training, think that it's lateral pterygoid, is because if they were  in the ballpark, now I think most people aren't. Most of the people that I've ever had that  are like, oh yeah, I palpate the lateral pterygoid. I'm like, did you? And I'll be like, put some  gloves on, palpate mine. And 100% of the time so far, 100% of the time, they palpate my  temporal tendon, okay, which is easy to get to. Okay, that's where your temporalis attach -  09 /01/25   Page   of 3   12

SSC 2.0 - 303: Initial Evaluation Part 2  es, right here. You could do it right underneath your zygomatic arch. If you put your finger  down and then open, that's coronoid process right under your finger there.  [0:09:44]  And they'll do that on the inside. And I'll be like, well, you're nowhere in the ballpark. You're  nowhere close. That's the coronoid process, which is the temporalis is coming down. And  yeah, that is tender in a lot of people with TMJ problems. So temporal tendon is important,  but they think it's the lateral pterygoid. If they actually are near the lateral pterygoid, then  dang this is gonna hurt like crazy. And then they're gonna say, oh, you see, it's lateral  pterygoid. Okay, again, that would be like me palpating the intercostal muscles from inside  the rib cage and being like, oh yeah, you've got a whatever problem. Like I would, you un -  derstand, I'd be moving the diaphragm muscle and all sorts of stuff to get to these inter -  costals and then making some sort of conclusion. That's completely preposterous. Now,  while we're here, let me back up a slide here. And again, we look here at the lateral ptery -  goid, switching gears a little bit and talking about sleep. So with sleep, the appliance holds  the jaw forward a little bit, right? And the theory that some people have there is like, oh,  okay, well because the lateral pterygoid was shortened, it's now hard for the lateral ptery -  goid to go back to its full resting length.  [0:10:59]  And therefore, that's why people can't get their bite back. I don't think so. So first of all, the  lateral pterygoid is not shortened to hold the jaw forward. The oral appliance holds the jaw  forward. So the analogy I like to use is if I held my arm here and if I put, especially if I put a  30-pound dumbbell in it, I couldn't hold it very long and my bicep muscle would be doing a  lot of work. But on the other hand, if I like had something here to rest it on and I just rested  my hand, even with a dumbbell in there, my biceps wouldn't be contracted anymore, right?  But here's a maybe even better observation that I've had recently and that I've used to ar -  gue with the lateral pterygoid shortener camp, is notice when you go to sleep tonight, what  you do with your arms and your legs. Now, unless you are a complete weirdo, you proba -  bly are not gonna sleep with your arms straight out like that, are you? You are probably  gonna sleep with your arms somewhere around here, okay, right?  [0:12:11]  This is like classic sleep posture right here, right?   Like this would be, if you're gonna draw  someone sleeping, you'd probably have their hands up around here someplace on their  pillow. That is a peaceful night's sleep. That is quintessential stereotypical sleep. Maybe  your arms are here, or they're here, or they're here, but they're probably not straight out  like that, right? Okay, your legs are probably a little bent. Now, here, it's interesting, right?  So if my arms are here, then my biceps are shortened. My triceps are actually elongated to  have my arms in this position, yeah? Not necessarily contracted, but the muscle has had  to lengthen to allow this movement at my elbow. But in the morning, I don't know about  you, but so far, I've never had a day where I was kind of like, man, I just can't get my arm  straightened out. I have a hard time reaching down to wash my legs or something like that  in the shower. I mean, that's stupid, right? So you're not having a problem, and that's a  09 /01/25   Page   of 4   12

SSC 2.0 - 303: Initial Evaluation Part 2  long ways. So that is a way shorter muscle here, and length compared to a, what, millime -  ter and a half, two millimeters that maybe the lateral pterygoid would go.  [0:13:31]  So I fully reject the idea that this reason that we can't get our teeth back together is some  impact of the lateral pterygoid, with the exception of that an oral appliance is a depro -  grammer, okay. So that I'll buy, and that is the idea that when you put any piece of plastic  between the teeth, the program, which is the muscle engrams of, that's where my teeth  touch, okay? That's a muscular engram. My brain knows to go there. If I put something be -  tween my teeth, regardless of what it does, so a night guard, an NTI, a sleep type of appli -  ance, whatever doesn't matter. My bite's going to be different because I've screwed with  that muscle engram. That I buy, but that's not a shortening of the muscle type of thing. It's  just a forgetfulness of the muscle to know, oh, that's where I go, and that's why once you  have put the teeth together, this is why I talk about a morning reprogrammer, right? We re -  program, and now they find it, and now they're back at it because that muscle engram is  restated. Okay, we cool? All right, so little segue there into sleep and stuff like that, teach  you a little bit about this.  [0:14:48]  Temporal tendon, bottom line there, that is a spot where you're gonna palpate inside the  mouth. On our forms, we might have medial pterygoid. I almost never touch medial ptery -  goid 'cause once again, that's an area where you're kind of going floor of the mouth, you're  going into a spot that's quite tender. If you've ever kind of like got food or something down  below your lower molars and hit that soft tissue down there, kind of hurts. So to go down  and palpate is uncomfortable. And you'll also learn, you'll also quantify and calibrate your  own palpation. I remember going to this guy once, he passed away years ago, but he's  one of my mentors, and he would palpate the sternocleidomastoid so hard, the patient  about pee their pants in the chair. I mean, it was just like aggressively hard, and the pa -  tients squirm or whatever. And sometimes he would kind of pinch his own, and he probably  was doing it for real, but it was a little bit of a show. So you'll figure out like, well, what is  normal response to being poked and prodded and what is not? And that's where you're go -  ing for. So a normal response might be a zero.  [0:16:04]  So if you are pushing and they're kind of like that doesn't feel great. And you're kind of like,  all right, well, that's what literally everybody says, including my family members that I prac -  ticed on, my assistants that I practiced on who don't have a problem, then that might be  your zero. And then they're kind of like a little bit more, that's a one, two, three, as they  completely pull away from you. Okay, so that's muscle palpation. Once again, we do this  on our comprehensive examination, not as much on our initial evaluation.  Imaging Records   [0:16:36]  09 /01/25   Page   of 5   12

SSC 2.0 - 303: Initial Evaluation Part 2  Okay, imaging records. Cone beam CT, I really believe as of 2025 is the gold standard.  You're gonna heaven forbid, if you ever ended up in court for frankly sleep or TMD, and  you were doing stuff and didn't have a cone beam CT, probably not gonna go awesome  because there's gonna be somebody on the other side that's gonna be like, you probably  should have got a cone beam CT. Now your side can say, well, that doesn't say that in the  literature and the guidelines, literature and guidelines say a Pano is sufficient. And then the  other side is gonna be like, well, yeah, but if you were to go to Tufts or to UCLA or to here  to there, or this expert that we brought in, they do Cone Beam CTs on everybody. Why is  that? So I would strongly encourage you to get a Cone Beam CT, even if you don't have  one, although nowadays they're so inexpensive, I think it makes sense for you to have  one. And I like to have them read by a radiologist.  [0:17:39]  In our practice, we use a friend that's a medical radiologist in my Boise practice and in our  Salt Lake practice, we use a company called Dental Ray and have for several years now.  They do great. They have a discount for Spencer Study Club members, probably still. As  of this recording, they for sure do, but maybe they do down the road too, as long as they're  still around. I think that's super important 'cause it's going to confirm what you see. Plus,  the main reason that we have a radiologist read is so that they catch stuff that we would  miss. And if you're getting like this whole area here, it's a lot of data there in that Cone  Beam CT. So I think you want to have it read. MRI, on the other hand, is for soft tissue.  [0:18:24]  Obviously, if we think that the disc is part of our issue, then we want to get an MRI. Okay,  so Cone Beam CT again, you can slice and dice the condyles in all sorts of ways and stuff  like that. This is actually my jaw joints here. And actually, you see that my jaw joints tend to  be kind of more in a normal position, that the condyle is actually pretty far down in the fos -  sa there, about just like the normal joint from the joint videos. And there's all sorts of stuff  that we can do with the cone beam and we can, of course, look at the airway. And that is  helpful as part of our kind of overall bigger evaluation of, hey you got a little bit of a narrow  airway here. It's kind of long. That might mean that it's more collapsible.  [0:19:17]  Do you snore? Has anyone ever said that you stop breathing when you sleep? And go  down that pathway. A ton of the patients who come to see us for a TMJ problem are re -  ferred for consideration of sleep studies. You know this from level one and level two. We  don't refer for sleep studies in our office. We refer to physicians who decide if the patient  gets a sleep study or not. That's how we roll. So the idea, though, of having this as part of  our comprehensive examination allows us to kind of bring this up and be like, hmm, I know  you've got a jaw problem. Remember, we're trying to get to the etiology. Why are you  banging your head against the wall? Well, maybe this airway thing has something to do  with it. And by the way, if you're a US-based dentist, most states don't have coverage for  TMJ, but they do have coverage for sleep apnea. So we will let people know that, hey, I  know we came in here for a TMJ problem. We can absolutely help you for your TMJ prob -  lem. However, as part of our evaluation here, and because you say you snore and your  09 /01/25   Page   of 6   12

SSC 2.0 - 303: Initial Evaluation Part 2  bed partner has noticed you stop breathing when you sleep, it's possible that you have an  airway problem.  [0:20:25]  And what do you think your brain cares more about, TMJ pain or air? Probably air, right?  So it's possible that some of the stuff you're doing with your jaw that's causing your pain is  related to this airway issue. We could refer you to a colleague of ours to determine if a  sleep study is indicated, whatever. If they find out you have sleep apnea, then we could  actually help you with that and kind of kill two birds with one stone here. We could treat  your TMJ problem and your airway issue with oral appliance therapy to protect both, and  that would probably be covered by your medical insurance. Now, the bummer is it's a lot  longer road to go down that, whereas we can start treating your TMJ problem immediately.  [0:21:05]  Okay, that's important. Now, let me give you, we'll go over this more in level four, but let  me give you some practice management right there. If somebody comes in 'cause they  have jaw pain and headaches, and this is affecting their quality of life, and you go down  the sleep apnea road, and it's gonna be months to even get them in for an evaluation,  they're probably not coming back 'cause you took them down a completely different thing.  They don't care about their possible sleep apnea problem that you're bringing up. They  care about their pain. So it's probable that they go back home, Google TMJ dentist in  wherever, San Antonio, and they find the guy that's gonna do the equilibration and crown  their teeth, put them into orthodontics, whatever, instead of you, because that person is  more focused, they think, on their TMJ problem.  [0:21:58]  Now, you're better, you're the one that's focused on getting to the etiology, but very often,  and this is more our Utah practice skews more TMD, our Boise practice skews more sleep,  in our Utah practice, we tend to start treatment on people, and then as part of the process,  get them in for the evaluation, possible sleep study, all that kind of stuff. And then that,  once they're diagnosed, then we might add a oral appliance for their sleep apnea, and  then that dovetails into the TMJ treatment that we are already providing them, but they're  already feeling better for their TMJ problem. Also, that puts you on stronger ground with  insurance, because insurance, as I've mentioned in level two, says that you can't treat  someone with a TMJ problem with oral appliance therapy.  [0:22:51]  So having them actively in treatment for their TMJ problem and being able to say, hey, the  patient's doing a lot better, they're stable now, and now we're adding oral appliance thera -  py, that could be a real nice road to go down. But bottom line, don't confuse the heck out  of people. You can get confused yourself. And if there's any hesitation, like, hey, yeah, I  can help you. I think this is what's going on, but I remember Jamison saying once that this  could be an underlying sleep problem that's doing this, and he uses the whole thing of the  banging your head against the wall, and I don't want to just kind of give you a helmet. I'd  like to get to the why are you banging your head against the wall. But yeah, man, in our  area, it's four to six months to get in for a sleep study, so that's going to be a drag 'cause I  09 /01/25   Page   of 7   12

SSC 2.0 - 303: Initial Evaluation Part 2  know you're in pain now, and you're kind of going through this mental dialogue, this inter -  nal dialogue out loud. The patient's going to be like, I don't even know what this person's  saying. I'm super confused. I just want to get out of pain. I'm going to go somewhere else.  So focus on why they're there.  [0:23:53]  The same thing happens to dentists early on, and I think I mentioned this in level two, but  just in case I didn't, let me mention it now. Someone comes in with worn interiors. They're  concerned about the aesthetics, and then you just talk about sleep apnea. They will just be  frustrated and won't do anything because they're not there for sleep apnea. They're there  for aesthetic-looking front teeth. So what do you do? Well, you address the why, and you  educate them on the why, and then you say, I can help you with these looking way better,  and I will, and here's how we're going to do this. However, you're going to invest $10,000  in these veneers, and that's a significant amount of money, and that's a significant invest -  ment, and I want to make this investment last a long time. And your teeth got this way for  some reason. One of the reasons that research over the past 30 years has shown is some  people grind out on their front teeth like that to try to protect their airway so they don't die.  [0:25:05]  What do you think your brain cares more about, pretty front teeth or air? Probably air,  right? So the bummer would be that we do these veneers, they look gorgeous, then your  brain is looking for that air at night coming out on your front teeth and breaks them off.  That would stink. None of us are going to be excited about that. So what I'd suggest, let's  go ahead and move forward with getting these gorgeous teeth that you want. I can also  protect them with a night guard and stuff, but that's not going to get to the underlying prob -  lem if you have an airway issue. So as part of this process, I'm going to get you to a friend  of mine. I'm your dentist. I'm not sure if you need to sleep study or not, but I think I'd like to  at least rule out that you have this airway issue 'cause if you do have this airway issue, this  dental work is not going to last as long as it should. Okay, may not last very long at all  'cause again, your brain cares way more about air than it does pretty front teeth.  [0:25:57]  Okay, you get my dialogue there? We're going to focus on what they care about the most.  Do educate them. Don't just leave them and be like, yeah, well, whatever, you know, and  then they come back and like, hey, you have this veneer popped off. You suck as a dentist.  You didn't use the right cement or something. No, it's like, hey, remember we talked about  this that maybe the airway is an issue here and we kind of ignored it then. Now it's coming  back. I can re-cement your veneer. Really, really, really important that we get this figured  out 'cause it's just like really reinforces what I talked about initially, originally that we kind of  ignored. I know you're busy and stuff like that. You're getting married and that's why you  wanted the dentistry done. So we kind of put that on the back burner. Okay, now it's time  to bring it to the front. Okay, cool. Like might write down that dialogue I just used right  there 'cause you're going to use this on a regular basis. All right. So that's Cone Beam CT.  09 /01/25   Page   of 8   12

SSC 2.0 - 303: Initial Evaluation Part 2  Imaging Records - Magnetic Resonance Imaging   [0:26:52]  Now let's move to MRI. MRI, soft tissue. Okay, so there's some assumptions we can  make. Like if we see a Cone Beam CT in the condyle is dang near touching the top of the  fossa like on those joint videos with the soft tissue, right? With the cadaver videos. But we  remember, so like normal, big bunch of space, reducing displacement, non-reducing dis -  placement, and of course degenerative joint disease, basically no space. If you see no  space, you can make a educated guess that the disc is not in place, right? Makes sense,  right? So there's no space. How the heck would the disc be in place? And if their history is,  I've been squashing Subway sandwiches or I've been squashing big sandwiches for the  past 20 years, what's the point of an MRI? So I don't get MRIs in those cases where it's  like, okay, this is clearly a non-reducing displacement. It's been this way for 20 years be -  cause it's not going to change my treatment plan on this person. I know what's going on  without the MRI. Now, typically we know what's going on without the MRI. Now, if you are  kind of a beginner, you won't, but you'll get good at this pretty quick. So then there are  some times that we'll get an MRI even though we know what's going on from our examina -  tion in history.  [0:28:21]  Those reasons would be a accident. So let's say that the person's got popping and clicking  even. So they have a reducing displacement. Click, click, click, click, click, click, click. You  palpate it, pop, pop, pop, pop, pop. And then we'll talk about this with the position in CR.  But another thing you can do on that initial evaluation I mentioned is bring the jaw forward,  have them open and close edge to edge, And usually, that'll get rid of the clicking, right?  'Cause it'll hold the disc in place. We aren't allowing their jaw to go back far enough to slip  off, have that disc slip off. That's another show them you can help them by actually helping  them. They'll blow their mind that that clicking goes away with just a slight positioning of  their jaw. So normally, you would not get an MRI in that case. When you would get an MRI  in that case is someone who claims that their jaw never clicked until X. Okay, my jaw never  clicked until I got in this car accident. Then you probably would get an MRI 'cause then you  would have documentation, objective documentation of that disc is out of place and then  when they open it pops back into place. You'd have objective documentation of a reducing  displacement.  [0:29:33]  When you suspect an acute non-reducing displacement, we'll talk about this more in injec -  tions outside the deep, dark hole and the unlocking procedure. But there I strongly en -  courage you to get an MRI to confirm what you think is going on. And I'll talk more about  this then, but that's for a couple different reasons. One, to make sure for the patient. So I  like to say, hey, I'm 95% confident that your disc is out of place based on your history and  my examination. You know, your jaw deflects to the side, go through the whole thing. We'll  use the TMJ demonstrator and show all the stuff that's going on. But then you say, before I  09 /01/25   Page   of 9   12

SSC 2.0 - 303: Initial Evaluation Part 2  stick a needle inside of your head, I'd like to be 100% sure. And most patients are kind of  like, I'd like you to be 100% sure as well before you stick a needle in the side of my head.  Good call.  [0:30:21]  Okay, so MRI, I want to get that to confirm my diagnosis. And sometimes that's to confirm  a reducing displacement. Again, if there's some claim of injury or iatrogenic injury, like they  got intubated and that's why they got a problem now.   So think that through of why would I  need this? 'Cause you cannot tell on a Cone Beam CT. So if they're like, yeah, Jamison,  took this Cone Beam CT and they have a non-reducing displacement. I'll be like, how the  heck do you know that? You have to have an MRI in order to know for sure if the disc is  out of place or not.  [0:30:58]  Now I put on here relatively expensive and question mark. So this will depend a little bit on  where you are. But if you're in the US, you should be able to find a independent MRI cen -  ter that will do these for $500 or $600 cash, okay? If the patient wants to go through their  insurance, and sometimes they will, typically it's going to be $2,000 to even $4,000 upper  end if they go to a hospital to have it billed to insurance. If they want to go that route, then  I'll send them to their medical doctor to get the prescription for the MRI. Because from the  dentist, it's probably not going to count at all. So if they want to get insurance coverage,  then they would have to, I would say, okay, well, go to your doctor and tell your doctor  what's going on. And that you're having this pain and show them what's going on with your  jaw and say, hey, I saw a dentist and he thinks that I need an MRI, but recommended I see  you because as my medical doctor, if you order the MRI, then it's more likely to be covered  by my insurance.  [0:32:07]  I've had some medical doctors who won't order their MRI 'cause they don't know what to  do. But usually what we do is we just send them to the independent imaging center be -  cause based on the math I just gave you a second ago, if it's $2,500 and that patient has a  20% copay, that's $500 out of pocket. So they're probably going to pay about the same or  maybe even less to do pure cash, okay? So that's MRI and the relatively expensive. And  granted, it's really not expensive. So most of us are charging 400-ish for Cone Beam CTs.  And in our office, that includes the reading by the radiologist. But an MRI is $500 and that  includes the reading by the radiologist. To put that in perspective, an MRI costs like $3 mil -  lion. You're in the tube for 45 minutes with someone there. My Cone Beam nowadays  costs about 100 grand and takes my staff member a few seconds to take it. So MRI is a  bargain. MRIs are a great deal. And I really like MRI. So get used to doing these. You got  to look at them yourself to know if the person has a problem or not. Don't just go by the  radiologist's report until you've done dozens with this MRI center and then you can trust  the radiologist's report. But even then, we never just go by the report. We always look at  the MRI ourselves, okay?  [0:33:49]  09 /01/25   Page   of 10   12

SSC 2.0 - 303: Initial Evaluation Part 2  And as I cover in level one, when the disc is in place, it's actually kind of hard to see. So  there is the disc in place. You can kind of make it out there. When the person opens, then  the disc is that hourglass shape between the condyle and the articular eminence. It's when  the disc is out of place that it's much easier to see. And so here you see the disc pushed  out in front of the condyle. And then when the patient opens, even though they can open  pretty wide, the disc is squished out in front of the condyle. That is what a classic non-re -  ducing displacement looks like.  Common Things are Common - Teeth First   [0:34:17]  So, at our initial evaluation, or as part of our comprehensive examination as well, we're go -  ing to look for common things being common. Rule out teeth first. You are a dentist, and  even if you have morphed into sleep only and now hopefully sleep and TMD only, you're  still a dentist. And people come in with jaw pain, and it's their tooth. A lot of referrals that  we get from medical doctors, their TMJ problem, quote, is a bombed out tooth, 'cause the  medical doctor never looked in their mouth. And they just said, oh, you have TMJ, go see  these guys. So, rule out teeth first, which is why we, on our initial evaluation, really like to  get at least a Pano. And sometimes we'll get the Pano from their general dentist, or we'll  even send them to their general dentist for a Pano. And that sometimes ends it right there,  right? They go to their general dentist, get a panoramic   X-ray, the general dentist like, well,  duh, no wonder you hurt. Here's this tooth problem you've got. And they take care of that,  and the person doesn't have a TMJ problem anymore.   So, rule out teeth first.  Muscles   [0:35:30]  Next is muscles. So, muscles are going to be a more common area of jaw pain than nec -  essarily the joint. Next would be the joint, and then there's all the weird stuff. One of the  things that kind of bothers me about the field of temporomandibular disorders, or more  somewhat recently referred to as orofacial pain, since that's a specialty now for the past  few years, is orofacial pain is looking more at these kind of zebra type of problems in many  cases, where it's the person has this issue, and it is a central nervous system issue. It is  something else going on. It is a neuralgia. It is something else. And those occur, but  they're quite rare. And if you're at your university center or something like that, which I  clearly am not, you could think that those are more common than they are because of the  nature of your practice. And you're getting funneled in all of these kind of weird cases to  you, and the common things that are common aren't coming in as much 'cause those are  being handled out in the periphery before they ever have to go to that level of the universi -  ty level orofacial pain practice, let's say.  [0:36:53]  09 /01/25   Page   of 11   12

SSC 2.0 - 303: Initial Evaluation Part 2  I don't like orofacial pain type of problems because many of them require management.  And like you, as a trained surgeon, as a dentist, I don't like managing problems. I like treat -  ing problems and getting rid of them whenever possible. Oral appliance therapy, one could  argue that we sort of manage that, but we do it in a very surgeon anatomical sort of way.  They wear this thing, keeps their jaw from falling backwards, they don't have sleep apnea  as long as they wear it, or it's significantly better if they wear it, and that's it. So we are  managing them, but we're managing them with a anatomical treatment. Even splint thera -  py, we are managing to a degree to take pressure off, PRF injections, all that kind of stuff,  but it's not the same as managing someone on drugs. So I don't, in our practice, we don't  manage people on medications. If I think someone's problem is a true neuralgia or some -  thing like that, usually it's not, but if it is, then I tend to refer them to actually pain manage -  ment doctors, neurologists and pain management MDs, because in the states where we  practice, Utah and Idaho, one, there aren't orofacial pain type of people, but even if there  were, I wouldn't send there because TMD in general doesn't tend to be covered by insur -  ance.   So they need a pain diagnosis, and that's going to come better from a MD who  treats pain, be a pain management doctor or a neurologist.  Bottom Line   [0:38:22]  Okay, bottom line for you, common things are common. Don't go straight to the like some  bizarre headache problem and you miss the tooth problem. Don't go straight to, you've got  degenerative arthritis. Well, they might have degenerative arthritis, but why is it hurt now?  Like they've had this degenerative arthritis maybe for, it degenerated over years and now  you're seeing this, why now? And the muscle pain could be why they're having that prob -  lem, okay? Common things are common, look for the common things first, and then if  things aren't making sense, then sometimes, well, first you post to the Facebook group,  we'll tell you if that doesn't make any sense, and then you maybe send to other people.  Again, my recommendation often in those cases is you bring in your medical colleagues,  pain management, neurology, ENT, rheumatology, people like that to dig deeper in a med -  ical sort of way, rule out bad stuff, right?   Splint therapy doesn't help brain tumors and  things like that. So when things don't make sense, I punt to my medical colleagues in the  community and make sure that all the scary stuff gets ruled out, and then we can get those  people if everything has been ruled out, maybe to physical therapy, maybe to pain man -  agement, stuff like that.  [outro music]  09 /01/25   Page   of 12   12

