SSC 2.0 - 207: Follow Up  SSC 2.0   Level 2  207: Follow Up  [intro music]  Follow up - Goals of Follow up Visits   [0:00:12]  So our next step, of course, then, is follow-up. So goals of follow-up visit are basically  snoring less, feeling better. Okay, so before that, though, of course, is making sure the pa -  tient has no comfort issues with the appliance. We reinforce this at the fitting. We remind  them that if they're having any comfort issues, they need to contact us. This is, again, an -  other reason that you might want to do some sort of quick, like, text follow-up or some -  thing, just a few days into treatment, while you might want to do that telemedicine visit so  that you know in advance if there's any comfort issues, get those taken care of. If they  have comfort issues, they're not going to use the appliance. So comfort issues are the  most important thing. And then after we get past the comfort issues, then it's, is the appli -  ance working? Working is objectively, is the snoring less? And that is going to be mea -  sured either by the patient's bed partner or SnoreLab. As I mentioned before, this is a rea -  son that you might consider having the patient download SnoreLab and start using Snore -  Lab before getting the oral appliance, as that way they'll have some baseline data there,  and then you can compare with the oral appliance.  [0:01:21]  If you hadn't done that before, then you could have them do it now, and they would then  obviously need to have some sort of baseline, because you can't just compare wearing the  appliance to wearing the appliance unless you're titrating it forward, so they would need to  go a night or two without the appliance to get that baseline data. Again, I would encourage  you to consider having the patient download SnoreLab at that first appointment and start  using that to have that data. Subjective is feeling more rested, okay? So other things that  we could have that to make it a little bit more objective, but we need to also take this with a  little bit of caution, is wearables. So I've got my Garmin watch here, you may have an  Apple watch, you may have an Oura ring, my wife wears an Oura ring. There's a bunch of  different things on the market, Fitbit, Whoop bands, all that stuff. The real key on all the  wearables is to help the patient understand that this is to give them data over a long period  of time, and to help them notice themselves that objectively from these wearables, their  sleep is variable.  [0:02:35]  And it's not always, not only is it not always easy to know if you've had a good night's  sleep, it's quite challenging. So I track my sleep every night, I wear my Garmin watch  every night, my wife wears her Oura ring every night, and when we check it in the morning,  09/01/25   Page   of 1   11

SSC 2.0 - 207: Follow Up  I will sometimes think to myself, well, how do I feel right now? Do I feel like I had a good  night's sleep? Did I wake up without my alarm going off? You know, do I remember waking  up multiple times throughout the night? Stuff like that. And while I will typically kind of have  a ballpark, my sleep will range anywhere. On the Garmin watch, it gives you kind of 100%  would be the best sleep possible based on its different parameters of how it's defining that.  And I don't remember ever having 100. I've had some nights in the 90s, very commonly in  the 80s, and then, you know, not uncommon in the 70s, or even today it was in the 60s,  and it said kind of fair, and that I had long enough sleep, and I had okay REM and okay  deep sleep, but that my, you know, rigorous exercise, I went on a mountain bike ride yes -  terday, and that that had impacted my sleep.  [0:03:53]  So the thing I like about tracking my sleep like that and that I like my patients doing the  same thing is it's showing me that there's many things that can be involved. Okay, that's  really the point, is you don't want the patient thinking it's 100% about this oral appliance,  because it isn't. What they do has an impact. Now, if they don't have any of those trackers,  then it's simply going to be subjectively, how do you feel? But like I said, even if they do  have the trackers, there's often not necessarily a giant correlation between how I feel and  how my tracker says my sleep was, right? So I'm still going to have that subjective, like to -  day I feel pretty good, and went on a nice swim and, you know, did my normal workouts,  doing this today, stuff like that. It's not like, oh, you know, my Garmin watch says my sleep  wasn't that great last night, so I think I'll just, like, do nothing today. Using these different  tools is important and understanding what you're going to do. Snoring less, feeling better.  [0:05:02]  Now, I not talked about you having to use pulse oximetry, home sleep testing, all that kind  of stuff. There are reasons to do that, and there are reasons not to do that. In my practice,  we don't do those things anymore. We used to do pulse oximetry. We used to do HSDs,  but after you've treated thousands of people, you get in a how we're going to do this here  in my local market, and my local doctors, we just get the patient back, and they do the  titrations. And just by this subjective, maybe a little objective with the SnoreLab app or  something like that, or the bed partner's report is also objective, just with that, you can get  people really, really close to that optimal position.  Progress Report   [0:05:50]  So here's our progress report, and again, this will be in the Document Center, and you can  adapt this to however you want. So at the top of the form, we have, actually the first ques -  tion is, how much you’re wearing the oral appliance? All night, every night, and then the  hours per night. Are you using CPAP with your appliance? Yes, no, sometimes. And then  the upward sleepiness scale. So why are we giving them the upward sleepiness scale? As  I mentioned before, because we are using this to objectively measure their sleepiness,  09/01/25   Page   of 2   11

SSC 2.0 - 207: Follow Up  and I'd like it to actually be a sleepiness scale, but we have it exactly the same verbiage  that we always have, which is, how likely you to doze off in these following situations, so  it's really a doziness scale, but just make sure that the patient is filling this out the same  way every time.  [0:06:35]  So if you have a patient, which would be more typical of women, that they aren't really  dozy in the first place, but are sleepy or fatigued, then just remind them, "Hey, remember  when you fill this out for us, and it was like, how often are you to feel fatigued or tired in the  following situations?" Same question. Okay, and then we're going to see that their score  from 18 is going to 16 and 14 and 12 and getting lower over time. Okay, next questions.  How does your bed partner rate your snoring? No snoring, better no change, worse, not  applicable, don't have a bed partner. Five, do you feel that your current job position is ef -  fective? Okay, yes or no. Do you feel more rested? Yes or no.  [0:07:16]  Okay, so that's that subjective, how are you feeling? How's the appliance fitting? Just right,  too tight, too loose, other, some space for them to put something there. Are you experienc -  ing any of these side effects? Jaw pain, tooth movement, tooth pain, other symptoms. Do  you like your appliance? Okay, on do you like your appliance is a kind of a weird question,  right? And we do this on purpose. Why we ask this question, because partly also you are  creating a case for if they ever are like, yeah, this didn't really help me that much. One of  the cool things with oral appliance therapy is if you ever do have a patient that's like,  "Yeah, that didn't help at all," then you say, "Cool, just give me your appliance back." And  they give you the appliance back and then usually within a couple of days, they call you up  and like, "Okay, I had no idea how well that was actually helping." So sleep, as you start to  get better sleep, you will kind of forget that you weren't sleeping well, but because this is  more of an anatomical issue, the airway issue, if you take away that anatomical splinting of  the airway, then they go right back to having a bad airway again, they have a bad sleep,  and they're not used to it anymore, so they usually feel way worse, okay?  [0:08:47]  TMD, which we'll talk about in Level 3, when you are out of pain, you forget that you were  ever in pain, okay? They may remember intellectually that they were, but they won't really  be able to remember it. So sleep is a little easier on the patient thinking that they weren't  helped because you just literally take their appliance away and within a few days, then  they realize how much they did help. But we ask this question, do you like your appliance?  And remember, no one gets an appliance from you because they've been waiting their  whole life to wear a piece of plastic in their mouth. They are really going for an outcome,  but still, to ask that question, and they will say, "Yes, I like it." That means that they're get -  ting the outcome that they want. If they say no, they don't like it, it usually doesn't, it's not  related to the outcome, it'll be related to some comfort issue that they're having, okay? So  that's why that question is there.  09/01/25   Page   of 3   11

SSC 2.0 - 207: Follow Up  Make Decision Regarding Position Change   [0:09:42]  Next, is there anything you'd change? Okay, same type of thing is with this is the, do you  like it? What would you change? And then they could give you some feedback that might  make it a little bit more comfortable for them than any comments. So our typical model  here, as is pointed out on the slide here, is we have the patient fill this out in the waiting  room and to make the best use of the dentist's time or your dental assistant's time. If  you're gonna do your telemedicine, these are things that a form like this, you could fill out  on the telemedicine and just kind of go through the questions with them and ask them the  exact same thing. And then that way, if you're gonna bring them in in person, then you  would know what to expect. It's too tight, it's bothering them, it's hurting this tooth. You  would know all that stuff in advance. The nice thing about having them do this in the wait -  ing room, if they're doing it in the waiting room, is it's not a surprise to the assistant. The  assistant can actually look at this and very quickly look at it and have a good idea of what  they're about to do and address their concern right up front.  [0:10:44]  So if the person's like, "Yeah, I don't like it, it's hurting my teeth," "Hey, I see on here that's  hurting your teeth, point to one finger where it is, let's address that immediately," rather  than kind of going into, "Hey, how's your snoring? How are you sleeping?" Who cares?  Because none of that matters yet because the patient has a comfort issue. So the comfort  issue is gonna be the chief complaint that they're gonna have and we need that taken care  of. Frankly, even if the patient's like, "Yeah, my snoring's gone, but darn, does this hurt?"  Their chief thing is gonna be how do I wear this long-term? My wife says I gotta wear it  now because it's made my snoring go away, but it hurts, so I need to get that figured out.  That's gonna be the main thing that you really focus on. Okay, ideally, as I just said, have  the assistant review this and then they're gonna know what to do. If there's any comfort  issues, that's the first thing that they're gonna jump on and then make decisions regarding  the position changes based on the patient's report. After you've done this for a while, your  assistants are trained.  [0:11:47]  The way this works in our practice is the assistant is going to make these decisions on  move forward, backwards, whatever. They will, again, for a while, you will have it where  they might come to you, you know, "Hey, Dr.Spencer, patient's coming in. This is their first  follow-up. They report that their snoring is better. They don't have any jaw pain, but the  snoring is not completely gone. I was thinking of bringing them forward a millimeter. Is that  kosher?" And you're like, "Yeah, that sounds great." And then that's what they do. And  sometimes you won't even see the patient. They'll ask the patient, "Hey, do you have any  questions for Dr. Spencer? He's with another patient. He doesn't want you to wait around  for him. Do you need anything?" "No, you know, no big deal. I'll catch him next time," or  whatever. And then they go. Okay? So that's your progress report.  09/01/25   Page   of 4   11

SSC 2.0 - 207: Follow Up  Deciding to Change the Position   [0:12:32]  All right. Why would we decide to, or what questions would we need to answer to decide to  change the position of the appliance? So to decide to move the appliance forward, or we  would move the appliance forward if the patient reports they're still snoring, or the patient  reports they're not rested or not feeling rested, or the patient reports they have jaw pain  and they're still snoring. Okay? So let me hit that again. Still snoring would be a reason to  move forward. Not feeling rested would be a reason to move forward. So either of those.  And then lastly, or they have jaw pain and they're still snoring. Okay. So we'll go over those  a little bit more here in just a second with the jaw pain because that could throw you a  curveball if you are kind of new here. Now, reasons to go backwards, move the appliance  backwards, notice that on this slide I have the ands. Okay? So the only reason we're going  to go backwards, if you took your bite record right, so if you started the patient comfortably  protruded, and when they were in, you checked them in that comfortably protruded, which  was your George Gauge position, and they said, "Yep, that just feels like it's keeping my  jaw from falling backwards." If you did all of that, it's going to be darn rare you're going to  take the jaw backwards. Okay? The place you're going to take the jaw backwards is at the  fitting appointment. When you ask the patient, "Does that feel like it's keeping your jaw  from falling backwards? Does it feel like it's jacking your jaw forward? Or that it's, you  know, doing nothing at all?"  [0:14:09]  The patient who says, "Hmm that feels a little uncomfortable. That feels like it's taking my  jaw too far forward." Okay, that's the person that you're going to back up right then. You  don't have to wait, you know, for the first follow up to take their jaw back. You're doing it  right then. So again, if you do the bite record right, if you do follow these kind of principles,  you're not going to be taking people's jaws backwards. Now the one you will take back -  ward though, is the person reports that they're no longer snoring, and they report that  they're feeling rested, and they report that they have jaw pain. Okay? Say that again. No  longer snoring, and feeling rested, and report that they have jaw pain. That would be the  reason that we're going to go backwards.  “Jaw Pain”   [0:14:54]  So let's go a little bit more into this jaw pain thing, because again, that could kind of con -  fuse you of like, why am I taking the jaw forward if they have jaw pain? And the backwards,  you get that. But remember, the only reason we're going backwards is they have jaw pain,  and they're not snoring anymore, and they're feeling rested, but they have jaw pain. So jaw  pain, we have to figure out what does that even mean? Because the patient could say they  have jaw pain, and that could be muscle pain, it could be joint pain, it could be, you know,  09/01/25   Page   of 5   11

SSC 2.0 - 207: Follow Up  their teeth hurt. All of that could be interpreted from the patient as jaw pain. So step one,  let's figure out what is this jaw pain? What does that really mean? So what I like to do,  have the patient point with one finger to where the pain is. This will typically either be in the  jaw joint or in the masseter. Sometimes, temporalis, but rarely. Joint, masseter are going to  be the most common by far. It will also typically be unilateral. Now this is true of virtually all  TMJ problems, that it will be worse on one side. Now it could hurt on both sides, but if you  ask the patient, like, okay, so I understand it hurts on both sides, is one side worse than  the other? They will typically say, "Oh yeah, it's way worse on the right, a little bit on the  left, but way worse on the right." So let's one finger to where that is.  Non-Intuitive Approach to “Jaw Pain”   [0:16:19]  All right. Now this is what I call the non-intuitive approach to jaw pain. So the intuitive ap -  proach to jaw pain would be to back it up, because you're thinking that that oral appliance  is stressing the jaw somehow by pulling it forward, and that that is causing the jaw pain.  That is just flat out not the case. Unless you have been taught by somebody else that  taught you to bring the jaw 70% to 80% of protrusion, and you over-protrude them right  from the get-go. If you start comfortably protruded, this is not going to happen, but if you  were taught by other people that taught the, what I would call old school way of that 70%  to 80% of max protrusion, then you certainly could have this happen, but if you do it the  way I taught you, then you're not going to really have this happen. So here's the non-intu -  itive approach, though. The non-intuitive approach, though, is that oral appliances are of -  ten not immediately effective in the initial position. Okay? My friend Colonel Neal once  said, "With CPAP, we start with efficacy and we chase compliance. With oral appliance  therapy, we start with compliance and we chase efficacy." Said another way, "CPAP pretty  much always works. A lot of people struggle to use it.  [0:17:39]  Oral appliance therapy, on the other hand, people usually can use it, it just doesn't always  work." So think about, we've got this airway issue, and now we stuff their mouth with plas -  tic, so to speak. Is that always going to protect their airway? Well, no. And how did you de -  termine this position? Well, comfortably protruded, right? How did you do it clinically? Well,  the patient said it was keeping their jaw from falling backwards. For a lot of people, is that  going to protect their airway? Yeah. But for everybody, no. Now you may say, well, Jami -  son, why don't we then use the pharyngometer on people? Well, because the pharyn -  gometer is you, the patient, sitting up awake. Or maybe they're laying down awake, but  they're awake. An awake airway and a sleeping airway have basically nothing to do with  each other. You could have a big airway that's very collapsible, or you could have a small  airway that is not collapsible. And again, just looking at it with a pharyngometer or a cone  beam. So if you're like, "Yeah, Jamison, I take a cone beam on my patient. And I take a  cone beam with them with the appliance in, so I know it's changing their airway."   Do you?  09/01/25   Page   of 6   11

SSC 2.0 - 207: Follow Up  And I think that that's over-irradiating people too, by the way. So I wouldn't do that. But  anything that we've got on the market as of 2025 anyway, no chance do we know for sure  that that's going to be effective. So it is a bit of a guess, but this is guessing based on tens  of thousands of patients. Between myself, my partners, Spencer Study Club members, this  is the way we do it. This is the best way to do it. So if you're a beginner in this, you are  benefiting from all of this experience that we've had over the years, okay?  [0:19:28]  So on the idea though, that the oral appliance isn't immediately effective in everybody.  Some people it will be. Roughly 50% of people, you hit a home run. Like 50% of the time,  that first position, they're like, "Oh my gosh, I'm not snoring anymore. I feel great," stuff like  that. But then there's that other 50%, right? So there's some people, there's a small group  of your patients that they are going to do what I call fight the appliance. They're going to  grind their teeth and try to protrude their jaw to try to protect their airway because you've  stuffed their mouth full of plastic.   You've potentially made their airway even worse. You  took away some of that space. Their tongue doesn't have as much room as it used to have  because now you've got that appliance there. So they will fight the appliance. If they're  fighting the appliance, then this can cause muscle pain or joint pain and/or joint pain.  [0:20:27]  So here are the key questions. If the jaw pain is due to lack of patent airway, ask the pa -  tient, "Are you still snoring? How are you sleeping?" Okay? Typically the patient will say,  "Yeah, snoring's still there. You know, wife says it's just as bad as it's always been or  maybe it's a little bit better, but I'm definitely still snoring." And they'll say, you know, "Yeah,  I don't really feel I'm sleeping that well." Okay, those are the key points to this non-intuitive  approach to jaw pain. "I have jaw pain. I'm still snoring and/or I'm not feeling rested."  [0:21:04]  Now, as I had on the last slide, the person who has jaw pain, but the snoring's gone and  they're feeling better, that's going backwards. Again, if you took the bite record the way  you're supposed to and stuff, that's almost never going to happen. This, on the other hand,  will happen because you have been conservative in your protrusion and you are trying to  find the least protruded to be effective. That's the goal. We don't want to jack people for -  ward just for fun. Mostly not because of jaw pain, mostly because of bite changes. I be -  lieve that if you take someone further forward, it's going to screw up those muscle en -  grams than if it's just minimally forward. If you had a patient that all you did literally was  just keep their jaw from falling backwards, then their bite would go back to normal almost  immediately, right? There'd be very, very little change. So the less we can protrude some -  one, the better for avoidance of side effects. That's the main thing there. Okay, Now, if the  patient is still snoring, not sleeping well, then the position will be moved forward, okay?  Snoring can be Nasal   [0:22:17]  09/01/25   Page   of 7   11

SSC 2.0 - 207: Follow Up  Now, there is a caveat in here that you also need to take into consideration, and that is  that snoring can be nasal. We ask, "How's the snoring? How are you sleeping?" And let's  say, let me give you a scenario here. They say, "Well, I'm still snoring, and I'm not sure that  I'm sleeping any better.” Okay, you would think this is going to take the jaw forward, and  you're probably right. If they say, "The snoring hasn't changed that much, I do feel more  rested." Hmm. Okay, so that's a little bit of a weirdness there, right? So snoring doesn't  seem to be affected much. Sleeping better, though, which is a check in the good column.  Regardless of those two scenarios there, doesn't hurt to say, "Okay, on your snoring, let  me ask you something. Do you snore in all positions? Back, side, stomach? As a matter of  fact, do you snore if you fall asleep on a plane and you're sitting up in a plane?" If they say  yes, then it's nasal snoring. Okay, and that's not necessarily a jaw protrusion thing. So if  they say, "Oh yeah, I snore all positions, doesn't matter, that, you know, the position has  nothing to do with it." Versus, "No, you know, the wife gives me the elbow, I roll over onto  my side, I don't snore." Okay, that's back of the tongue snoring. Nasal snoring doesn't  cause sleep apnea though. So nasal snoring could disturb some sleep.  [0:23:54]  And if the jaw protrusion helps their sleep, one would think that they have a back of the  tongue issue too. But what I would do in that case, if I'm trying to rule out nasal snoring, is  Afrin and either Breathe Right strips or nasal aid, something to kind of open the nose up.  And the Afrin is kind of shrinks all the tissues on the inside and do that one night. So just  have them do that, say, "Call me tomorrow." And if they call up and like, "whoa, eureka,"  and maybe they're using the SnoreLab app and their number goes way down, or maybe  their bed partner says, "Holy cow, that made a huge difference," then what are we gonna  do? Refer to ENT, right? So that's a in the nose problem. So we're gonna refer that patient  to ENT toot sweet and get their nose cleaned out. And I've mentioned this on other videos,  but ENTs love those patients, by the way. So they'll be super stoked that you refer such  patients because the outcomes are awesome, the procedure's simple, the reimburse -  ment's good. So that's what we're gonna do there.  [0:24:56]  Okay, so hopefully that all makes sense. This is, again, non-intuitive. This isn't the obvious  thing. And by the way, a lot of dentists have made mistakes on this over the years, particu -  larly dentists that are beginners, and you may have made this mistake too. You give  somebody a silent night, you just kind of start them wherever you start them. You weren't  really that thoughtful or didn't even know how to take a bite record or any of that kind of  stuff, so you just kind of started them wherever you started them. And then they come  back and like, "Ow, my jaw's hurting." So you're like, intuitively, you're thinking, well, let's  go backwards, because the only thing that changed here is I gave you an appliance that  brought your jaw forward and now you're hurt, and you wouldn't even know to ask them,  "How's the snoring, how are you feeling," because you're just concerned about the jaw  pain. You take it back a step because they're fighting the appliance. Going backwards is  the opposite of what needs to happen, yes? So now they're fighting the appliance even  09/01/25   Page   of 8   11

SSC 2.0 - 207: Follow Up  worse, and then you're like, "Okay, forget it. Just stop wearing that   appliance, here's your  money back," whatever.  [0:25:52]  Okay, that's happened minimum tens of thousands of times, because it's non-intuitive. And  I learned this on my own, right, and now I've taught it to thousands of dentists, and knock  on wood, but I've never had a dentist contact me and be like, "Hey, I did that non-intuitive  approach to jaw pain thing, and now the patient has worse jaw pain." Doesn't happen,  okay? So you walk them through this, it's gonna be exactly like I've said here, and when  this is the correct diagnosis, that your airway is not protected, by the way too, the patient  won't be concerned about it. And you're like, "You know what, I think what's going on here  is you're fighting this appliance because your airway's not protected completely. That's why  you're still snoring, that's not why you're not feeling well. Let's go forward a little bit, I bet  that'll take care of it." The patient will go, "Yep, that makes sense." Okay, now let's get into,  if you're worried about this, a way that you can do this is tell the patient to set an alarm  that's like a few hours after they go to bed, and then to wake up, kinda check in with them -  selves on the jaw pain, and if it's worse, then take the appliance out, I'll call you the next  day. Again, if you've kind of followed my steps here, that's rarely, rarely, rarely ever going  to happen.  Pain in the TMJ   [0:27:03]  Now let's go over kind of the individual joint or muscle pain. Pain in the jaw joint is usually  due to protrusion. Now I just gave you the under protrusion scenario there, they're fighting  the appliance. The over protrusion scenario, I gave you there as well, which is you started  them too far in the first place. Further protrusion is indicated if they're still snoring and not  feeling well. Reduced protrusion is indicated when the snoring is improved and they're  sleeping better. Okay, so we've gone over that pretty good. Other thing to check out for  pain in the jaw joint is when you have an appliance that is bilaterally adjusted, so not a an -  terior pull push appliance that comes from the center, but any type of pull or push or inter -  locking appliance, you can have the patient off to the side accidentally. And particularly  those Herbst-style appliances where it's like down on one side, up on the other side, or  some interlocking appliances have those same sorts of mechanisms. It's not uncommon  for a patient to be confused by that and to go like up and up. And if you went up and up,  that means you went forward and backwards. And so we've seen that time and time again  where people will be kind of cocked to one side. And interestingly, it's almost always the  less protruded side that hurts, okay? It's not the more protruded side. Again, you would  think intuitively, yeah, we're gonna hurt this jaw. I don't think that's the case. Bringing the  jaw forward is typically not the problem. So usually in that case, it's the side that's farther  back. You then match it up and now everything's cool.  09/01/25   Page   of 9   11

SSC 2.0 - 207: Follow Up  Pain in the Masseter   [0:28:48]  Masseter pain is almost always vertical. Let's talk about this really quick. So if you get rid  of all of their freeway space, then they're going to bite on it. There's a couple appliances  on the market that I don't like the design because of this. The way the appliance works is  you have like interacting pads that have to hit. So they have to basically be in occlusion in  order for it to work. I prefer an appliance that they don't have to be in occlusion in order for  it to work. So something like a pull appliance or a push appliance. Certain interlocking ap -  pliances, you   don't need to be together like this to have it work. You can open a little bit  and those interlocking mechanisms are still going to work, but there's a couple interlocking  appliances kind of fashioned after the twin block, which is an orthodontic appliance, and  you basically, it's not going to work if your teeth aren't together. And unless that person  was like that before, so if this was somebody that spent a lot of time with their teeth to -  gether, then they'll be okay because they're used to it. They're kind of a trained athlete in  that teeth together stuff. On the other hand, if they're a 1% occluder, then they're not going  to like that at all. And you give that patient an appliance that causes them to have their  teeth together. Now, again, this isn't clenching per se. If you or I, let's say that both of us  are 1% occluders and we put a piece of plastic in our mouth and then we just gradually  make it taller, taller, taller, taller, taller, there's going to be a certain point where my space  that I normally have my teeth apart is gone. It's taken away by the material.  [0:30:36]  And at that point, my just kind of typical resting position is going to be there. And the way  my physiology works is the second my teeth have any kind of pressure there, it activates  my masseters. Because typically for me, a guy who's a 1% occluder and spends almost no  time with his teeth together, teeth together means go time. It means we're eating. This is  active. Let's do this. So when you take away my freeway space, then that's going to be  problematic and cause muscle tension because I've not ever done that before. Okay, so  bottom line, reduce the vertical on the appliance. Now, there is a throw the wrench in here  too. We still want to be asking about the snoring and the sleeping because if they're fight -  ing the appliance, then this can be part of it too. And that could be protrusion. All right, so  step one, how's the snoring? How are you sleeping? If the snoring's still going on and  they're not sleeping well, then think protrusion. And you can also ask about the height. The  way I ask about the height is, "Does this feel too tall or too small? Okay, too tall or too  small."  [0:31:54]  And if they're like, "Yeah, it's pretty darn tall, you know, my teeth are on it," or you see that  their teeth are on it, you can see that their masseters are contracted when they're just sit -  ting there in your office, that'll probably be the case. But don't forget that step one, though,  is we're going to decide protrusion, and that's about that fighting the appliance. On the ver -  tical two, this is another thing. At the fitting, you're checking that vertical. If they can't close  09/01/25   Page   of 10   11

SSC 2.0 - 207: Follow Up  their lips around it, if they have mentalis strain to get their lips around it, then reduce the  vertical. And one more thing on this, if they have a, so reducing the vertical, that's easy on  a pull appliance. On the push appliance, it's a little bit more challenging because they're  flat on flat. On the interlockings, they're flat on flat, but you can usually do it in some way.  The anterior pull push, though, is a unique case with this. Those appliances you can have  with posterior support, little pads in the back like an EMA would have. But again, I'm talk -  ing tap appliances. They'll put little pads there, and you might decide, yeah, I want that on  everybody.  [0:32:56]  However, the original design of the pull push appliance was that it only hits in the front on  purpose. So kind of an NTI effect or a deprogrammer effect. And the theory behind that is  that when you bite down on the front, that it's a mechanical disadvantage. So you can't  contract those muscles as much. However, something we found over the years is that  when we do that in some people, it's not common, but in some people, if they're having  muscle pain and the snoring's better, they're feeling better, so we think the jaw position is  right, but they're having some muscle pain, then somewhat non-intuitively, somewhat sur -  prisingly, we add acrylic to give them posterior support, and it makes their jaw pain go  away. My theory on that is these are people that their swallowing is pretty much the only  time that they're normally getting their teeth together, and it doesn't feel as good. So if you  swallow with your back teeth together, that's nice and solid, right? If you try to swallow with  just your front teeth together, that doesn't feel quite the same way. So my theory is that  giving those people posterior support allows their muscles to work more naturally, and they  don't have to strain to do something, and then that feels better.  [0:34:16]  Again, it's kind of weird that you would give them something to bite on, and then they feel  better with that, but that's been my experience. So the people with an anterior pull push,  you think the position's right. Remember, that's primary. Airway, protecting the airway is  number one. Protecting the airway is number one whenever we have jaw pain. Is the air -  way protected? You think the airway's protected, then you're thinking vertical. Well, with an  anterior pull push appliance, that vertical's fixed. So now, if they don't have posterior sup -  port, I'd add it. If they have posterior support, I might consider actually reducing it and see  if that NTI effect helps. Okay, so hopefully that helps. We'll go into this a little more detail  on another session here, but hopefully that gets you feeling ready to rock and roll. If  somebody comes in with pain, you know what to do.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 11   11

