SSC 2.0 - 102: Anatomy Review Part 2  SSC 2.0   Level 1  102: Anatomy Review Part 2  [intro music]  Mandibular Division - Trigeminal Nerve   [0:00:12]  All right, let's talk a little bit about the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve. As you  are well aware, we have the mandibular division here with the inferior alveolar nerve going  into the mandible, and this branch here being the lingual nerve. And remember, we talked  about that a moment ago that the corda tympani from the facial nerve anastomosis with  the lingual nerve going to the tongue for the anterior two-thirds taste, the lingual nerve to  your tongue for touch, for feeling, the sensory component of feeling. So with our inferior  alveolar nerve, it goes into the mandibular foramen here and then comes out right here at  the mental nerve. Now, a little quiz question for you here. If you wanted to anesthetize the  lower anterior teeth, the lower anterior teeth, what kind of injection would you give? Mental  nerve block, right? Well, technically that's wrong. Now, I don't want you to change what  you write in your chart if you give a mental nerve block because, in my experience, every -  one on the planet calls this a mental nerve block other than Stanley Malamed, who, again,  I've had the privilege of having lunch with multiple times as we run across each other's  path at different lectures.  [0:01:33]  And this, in his book, and you probably learned this back in dental school, if you were to  anesthetize, so again, let's think about that, this nerve coming out of the mental foramen,  so to speak, is called the mental nerve. If you were to anesthetize the mental nerve, what  would get numb? Well, the lip and gums, not the teeth. The nerve to the teeth is this nerve  here, which is a continuation of the inferior alveolar nerve, and from this point on, it's actu -  ally called the incisive nerve. Now, everyone calls this a mental nerve block or a mental  foramen block would be more appropriate because we are giving the anesthetic at the  mental foramen with the goal of it seeping through the mental foramen to affect that inci -  sive nerve, so technically, incisive nerve. And let's talk a little bit more about some  mandibular anatomy here.  [0:02:25]  So I'll do some more point and you can yell at home if you remember these parts and  pieces here. So this, of course, is the condyle. This is the coronoid process. Looking at the  other side here, here's our mandibular canal that we were just talking about. Here's the  mylohyoid ridge, and this is the line for the nerve to the mylohyoid. And then here we have  the genial tubercles from this view, we can look at that from the inside, so 13, 14 are the  09 /01/25   Page   of 1   18

SSC 2.0 - 102: Anatomy Review Part 2  genial tubercles. And at the genial tubercles we have our genial glasses, genial hyoid or  commonly referred to as the tongue. So the tongue attaches to the back of our chin, this is  why dentists are involved in obstructive sleep apnea, because as we bring the mandible  forward, the muscles that are attached to the mandible open up the airway. This is why  with CPR you do head tilt, chin lift. Going through some of these other muscular attach -  ments, so number two here of course is the masseter. I'd like you to look at the breadth of  attachment of that muscle. So it's that whole area of the ramus of the mandible. Just a  huge area for the attachment of the masseter. The temporalis attaches here at number  one going all the way down here at this other view. You can see it goes all the way down  there to the occlusal surface, that is all temporal tendon or the temporalis muscle attach -  ment. On the inside we have for the medial pterygoid number nine there.  Muscles of the Head and Face  Muscles: Rules of Innervation   [0:03:57]  And then some of these other attachment points are for muscles of facial expression. All  right, let's get into those muscles now of the head and face. We'll start off with the muscles  of facial expression. So the muscles of facial expression are all innervated by the facial  nerve, which also supplies the stapedius, stylohyoid, and posterior belly digastric. And you  remember why that is? Because they came from the same embryological tissue. These  came from that second hyoid or a second or hyoid arch.  Muscles of Facial Expressions   [0:04:28]  Now the muscles of facial expression include all of these muscles. I'm not going to read all  of these to you. And the muscles of facial expression, now you memorize these once upon  a time, and you could pick them out on a cadaver, but also not implicated that much in  temporomandibular disorders. And when I say not much, I mean basically never. And here  is a drawing of the muscles of facial expression. And question for you, did your cadaver in  dental school look like that? I bet it didn't. Mine didn't either. And why is that? That these  muscles are so distinct and there's so many of them. And again, we had to memorize kind  of in general, kind of where they were, because it would vary from cadaver to cadaver  what they looked like.  [0:05:17]  And here's one of the reasons that, like you may remember dissecting the forearm, for ex -  ample, and all those muscles were very distinct and easy to kind of tell which was which.  But the muscles of facial expression, that wasn't the case. And here's why. So all of our  muscles have an origin and an insertion. The origin is the less movable part. The insertion  09 /01/25   Page   of 2   18

SSC 2.0 - 102: Anatomy Review Part 2  is the more movable part. Okay, so the origin of all of your muscles of facial expression are  the skull or the mandible. What is the insertion? Did you say the face? Yeah, so the inser -  tion of the muscles of facial expression is your face to move your face. So when you skin  the cadaver, what happens with parts of those muscles? Well, they come off. You can't  move your face with the muscles of facial expression unless they're attached to your face.  And as you remove that skin of the face, you removed some of those muscles. So that's  why facial dissections in drawings look like this, but in reality are not quite as distinct. So  once again, the facial nerve goes to our muscles of facial expression for motor, for moving  them. And rarely, again, actually I shouldn't even say that.  [0:06:37]  I do not ever recall a patient having a facial muscle pain problem. Like you could get a  twitch with your eye with a bacillus oculi or something like that. But pain, that is going to be  very, very, very, very, very, very, very rare. I've never seen it. Maybe you will someday. So  the problem with the facial nerve or the problem we associate with the facial nerve is  what? Bell's palsy. So Bell's palsy is when there's a palsy, so the patient is not able to  move half of their face. So the facial nerve is affected and they have that, again, palsy or  an inability to move that half of their face. The bummer with Bell's palsy is the cause is not  understood. Treatment, therefore, is not specific. So some theories are, well, maybe it's a  viral effect. So people will be put on antivirals. Sometimes people, they'll use TENS units  to get the muscles to move to hope that that works. Neurologists will typically say, well, if  you have Bell's palsy, it might get better and it might not. And about half the time, it gets  better for unknown reasons. So you're not going to be involved with this much.  [0:07:56]  So if you ever have a patient that comes in to you because of Bell's palsy, you're going to  refer them to a neurologist because there could be something bad that's putting pressure  on their facial nerve and splint therapy is not going to be what you're going to do with that.  I have had a couple people in my entire career that have Bell's palsy. They'd already had  bad stuff ruled out by the neurologist, got in to see us. We did some TENSing of their mus -  cles. They got better. Probably what I did had nothing to do with them getting better. It was  just coincidental. But again, this is a rare, thankfully, problem and one that we aren't going  to see very often. But these all muscles of facial expression, including your platysma, is a  muscle of facial expression and all the muscles of facial expression are innervated by the  facial nerve. Now here's kind of my segue slide between the muscles of facial expression  and the muscles of mastication. So this muscle here that is your cheek muscle, come  down here to the first couple letters of it, that's the buccinator. So the buccinator in your  cheek.  [0:08:53]  So let's have a little debate here with one another. Is the buccinator a muscle of mastica -  tion or is it a muscle of facial expression? So guess, which one do you think it is? Okay,  now maybe if you were really paying close attention, you said facial expression because it  was on the slide, two slides ago listed as one of the muscles of facial expression. On the  other hand, most dentists will say, well, it's a muscle of mastication because they're think -  09 /01/25   Page   of 3   18

SSC 2.0 - 102: Anatomy Review Part 2  ing that it has to do with mastication because it holds food between your teeth when you're  chewing. However, I think we would also agree that the orbicularis oris keeps soup from  spilling out on my shirt, but that doesn't make it a muscle of supination. Okay, that's my fa -  vorite anatomy joke right there. Okay, I hope you enjoyed that. I love it every time I tell that  joke. Made that up probably 15 years ago, and it still brings a smile to my face every time I  tell it. So really though, this is a muscle of facial expression. How come it's a muscle of fa -  cial expression? Well, because it came from that second or hyoid arch and because it's  innervated by the facial nerve. When you are putting your troops together, you are using  your facial nerve to send those signals to have that muscle do that.  Muscles of Facial Expressions (Buccinator)   [0:10:15]  When you are using the buccinator to keep food between your teeth, when you're using  your orbicularis oris to keep food from spilling out of your mouth, you are using your facial  nerve to send those signals for it to do that. All right, muscles of mastication. These are all  innervated by the trigeminal nerve, which also innervates these other muscles. How  come? Because of embryology. That's where it came from. That's from our first arch, our  first branchial arch. Muscles of mastication, I know you're very familiar with these. These  are pretty easy to remember, and you do palpate these in your examination and whatnot.  So here's our temporalis muscle, our masseter muscle, and we're going to go in more de -  tail on the masseter in a second. And then we have our lateral pterygoid. We'll go over that  in detail too. And our medial pterygoid. Here's that buccinator again with the turgo -  mandibular rifae and the superior pharyngeal constrictor there behind it. We'll talk about  that when we talk about trismus. I'll come back to that picture as we talk about trismus. Be -  fore I leave this, just kind of point out the lateral pterygoid. And for people who believe that  they can palpate the lateral pterygoid, just realize how far back that is and that you have to  push the buccinator through.  [0:11:24]  You'd have to take your finger kind of through the buccinator to even get close to the later -  al pterygoid. That would not be terribly comfortable for the patient. So most believe that  you cannot palpate the lateral pterygoid. There are some studies that show that you actu -  ally can palpate the lateral pterygoid, but it's incredibly painful if you do. So I don't know  how much clinical value that would give to you.  Muscles of Mastication (Masseter)   [0:11:47]  All right, so let's talk about the masseter. So on these slides, you'll see origin, insertions,  and innervations. Yes, innervation has a specific nerve name, but in general, just kind of  try to remember that all of the muscles of mastication are innervated by the mandibular di -  09 /01/25   Page   of 4   18

SSC 2.0 - 102: Anatomy Review Part 2  vision of the trigeminal nerve. Mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve, okay? Not the  maxillary division. Maxillary division is just basically your upper teeth and soft tissue there.  The mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve is not only going to go to the mandible, the  mandibular teeth, but it's going to go to all of the muscles of mastication. Temporalis, mas -  seter, medial pterygoid, lateral pterygoid. All right, so you're going to see also on these  slides, these are pictures that my friend Jim Boyd put together years and years and years  ago. And he just simply drew some arrows on here.  [0:12:34]  So what do muscles do? Well, they contract, don't they? And what else do they do? Well,  they don't contract, okay, or what we call they relax. So when they contract, you may re -  member in your physiology that they have those actin and myosin rods and they kind of  slide against each other. So muscles shorten and they do that along the long axis of their  fibers. So when you may have seen me do this in an in-person lecture, I'll usually pick  someone out on the front row and I'll say, okay, if I was to lasso that person, could I pull  them over to that wall? If I stand here and I've lassoed them over there, could I pull them  over there? And the answer is, well, no, I can pull them to me. And that's it. I can pull them  in a straight line. Muscles work in straight lines. The reason I'm able to talk right now, the  reason you're able to chew food, the reason you're able to do what you do with your mouth  and your face is because of all the different muscles working in concert with one another,  all pulling along straight axis lines, but doing so together in order to get these different  movements.  [0:13:41]  All right, so that's why you're going to see these vectors, if you will, and then also the effect  on the condyle when we contract these muscles, what that would ultimately do to the  condyle. Now, you also notice in these pictures two masseters. So we've got our superfi -  cial masseter and we have our deep masseter. So the superficial masseter is really what  you think of when you think masseter. We think of this main muscle here, we think of that  in the origin. But there's a deep masseter that is deep, as the name implies, and it goes  straight up and down. So that masseter in general, if you are contracting the superficial  and the deep masseter, you would bring the condyle forward and up would be the net ef -  fect there of the masseter.  Muscles of Mastication (Lateral Pterygoid)   [0:14:57]  Now, lateral pterygoid, kind of a crazy muscle. So we have an inferior belly of the lateral  pterygoid, which is what you think of when you think of lateral pterygoid. So the inferior  belly of the lateral pterygoid on these netter drawings here is shown but with two bellies.  So both that top and this bottom are the inferior belly of the lateral pterygoid. And then this  little top part here that goes and attaches to the disc, that's called the superior belly, which  we'll talk about next.   So the inferior belly of the lateral pterygoid, like I said, is what you  09 /01/25   Page   of 5   18

SSC 2.0 - 102: Anatomy Review Part 2  think of when you think of lateral pterygoid. This is the muscle that if we move our jaw side  to side, that is lateral pterygoid. Moving our jaw laterally involves the lateral pterygoid. Pro -  truding our jaw involves bilateral contraction of the lateral pterygoid. So to protrude your  jaw, lateral pterygoid, okay? So that is the inferior belly of the lateral pterygoid. That's the  muscle you think of when you think of a lateral pterygoid is the inferior belly. The superior  belly is, again, this little line here that's above the inferior belly and goes into the disc.  You'll see here on the insertion, articular disc, condylar head joint capsule. So it doesn't so  much move the jaw as much as it attaches to the disc. Now, this is kind of a crazy muscle.  And this kind of blows my mind. And I hope it blows your mind, too, because we don't ex -  actly understand what this muscle does, believe it or not. So in 2025, as I'm recording this,  this is SSC 2.0. It's still kind of out there for debate on what this is doing. So we know  where it goes.  [0:16:12]  We anatomically know where it goes. We know it's innervated by the mandibular nerve.  But the actual what it does is a little still up for debate. So this study was way back in 2008.  Regional properties spearheaded the lateral pterygoid muscle. I'll go ahead and read this.  The data provide additional evidence that the superior head of the lateral pterygoid is func -  tionally heterogeneous, so different, and together with previous evidence for functional  heterogeneity within the inferior head of the lateral pterygoid. So this idea that it is not ho -  mogeneous but heterogeneous to the inferior belly, the superior belly of the lateral ptery -  goid, and the inferior belly of the lateral pterygoid, don't work together. They work kind of  opposite together. So down to this, this supports the proposition that both heads should be  regarded as functionally heterogeneous. These are different muscles. Okay, isn't that  nuts? So again, the lateral pterygoid, the inferior belly, that's what you think of in the lateral  pterygoid. Superior belly doesn't seem to be under our conscious control. So you can't just  like put tension on your disc right now while you think about it, where you can move your  jaw side to side.  [0:17:22]  So again, kind of throw that out there. Some of the studies from way back when showed  that if you clench your teeth, there seems to be contraction of the superior head of the lat -  eral pterygoid. Maybe that's why people who clench their teeth are more likely to have disc  displacements. Maybe, maybe not. The other thing too, if you're clenching your teeth, is  you're going to contract all those elevators. That's going to put pressure up on the disc. So  maybe that combination will result in disc displacement. Bottom line, I just want you to  know that the superior belly and the inferior belly are heterogeneous. They don't do the  same thing.  Muscles of Mastication (Medial Pterygoid - Temporalis)   [0:17:57]  09 /01/25   Page   of 6   18

SSC 2.0 - 102: Anatomy Review Part 2  Medial pterygoid basically forms a sling with the masseter and its function is basically the  same as the masseter. It's going to protrude the mandible as well as elevate it just like the  masseter does. Okay, temporalis is another cool muscle. So it's a fan-shaped muscle. We  don't have a lot of fan-shaped muscles in our body, but the fan-shaped muscles we have  do similar things like this, where it depends on what portion of the muscle you contract to  get the action. So we have, while we have the fan here, the origin is through this whole  temporal fossa.  [0:18:37]  The insertion is all at our coronoid process. So depending on which portion of the tempo -  ralis you contract will be the effect on the mandible. So for fun, you know, palpate your an -  terior temporalis and if you clench, you'll feel that swell up in your fingers. If you retrude  your mandible, you won't feel much or anything at all in the anterior temporalis. If you pal -  pate the posterior temporalis and clench, you may feel something, you may not. But if you  retrude your mandible, then you'll feel that swell up under your fingers. Okay, so if you re -  member from your anatomy too, or if you have a dry skull there or something like that, the  anterior temporalis of a skull is kind of dished in at the anterior temporalis area there. So  the anterior temporalis, we have a big thick muscle. The posterior temporalis is quite thin.  Why would that be? Well, because we almost never use the posterior temporalis. We use  the anterior temporalis the majority of the time. This is another one to kind of like tuck  away because if you gave someone something that caused their arc of closure to change.  So let's say they've got an arc of closure like this.  [0:19:49]  So here's their upper teeth, lower teeth, and you gave them aligner trays or they got some  anterior dental work that caused them to change their arc of closure a little bit. So they  have to kind of like hit and slide, retrude it a little bit. They have to hit and bring their jaw  back a little bit, hit and bring their jaw back. So they were used to kind of hitting in one  spot. Now they have to kind of hit and retrude their mandible a little bit. If they did that,  they'd be using their posterior temporalis and maybe they never have used that muscle in  their life before and that could result in some pain. Now once again, as I discussed before,  not sure your patient's going to connect. I have a headache above and behind my ear and  that seems to be related to when I started aligner treatment. Okay, so because of that, you  might proactively ask questions and also even give people a little heads up. You don't want  to kind of freak people out that they're going to have problems because you know some  people they may create problems, right? Like you've heard of the phenomenon of medical  students getting all the diseases that they cover, right?  [0:21:03]  But when they come in wearing their aligners and stuff, you could ask, hey, are there any  problems? Any discomfort with the aligners? Anything like that? No, no, no, everything  feels great. Cool, no like weird headaches or any pain in your head or anything like that  since wearing the aligners? And 99.999% of the time, patient's going to be like, no, I'm  cool. Everything's fine. And then, you know, maybe one out of a thousand, maybe one out  of 10,000 is going to be like, well, actually, funny you should mention that because I do  09 /01/25   Page   of 7   18

SSC 2.0 - 102: Anatomy Review Part 2  seem to be having this headache. It's really weird. You know, I wake up with it in the morn -  ing and it seems to get better throughout the day, but could that have something to do with  this? Okay, and if it's right back in here, that would make sense anatomically.  Muscles Fun Facts   [0:21:42]  All right, now let's have a few fun facts about muscles. I've already discussed that muscles  contract or relax and they contract in a straight line. Okay, so let me give you kind of a little  example here and see if you can kind of help me figure this out. So here I have my pointer  that you've seen me using here.   And if I was to curl this pointer, so I contract my bicep  across my elbow joint moving this joint. And then now, just kind of in your mind's eye, be -  cause I don't have one sitting around here in my studio, let's say that I had a 45 pound  dumbbell. And trust me, I can curl 45 pounds, not a lot, but I can. So let's say that I'm curl -  ing this 45 pound dumbbell. Okay, same movement, same exact movement, 45 pound  dumbbell or same movement with my few ounces pointer. What's the difference? There's a  difference of weight, but what's going on in my muscle that's different? Now you may be  having this thing in your brain right now. You're like, okay, wait a second. I know I studied  that in school, maybe in college, maybe again in dental school, and it had something to do  with motor unit recruitment, didn't it? So, we have a motor unit. So a motor unit is a skele -  tal, a group of skeletal muscles, muscle fibers, and a nerve going to that motor unit. Okay,  so here we see this, the myofibrils, the muscle fibers, we have this motor unit, this bundle  of fibers, and then we have a single motor neuron that goes to that group of fibers, that's  called a motor unit.  [0:23:34]  Now you may also remember from physiology a phrase, all or none, or all or nothing. What  did that have to do with? Well, that had to do with when we contract that muscle, those  motor units that are firing, they are either contracting 100% or not at all. So when I curl the  pointer, far less motor units are being used versus if I'm curling a 45 pound dumbbell. This  is why when we go to the gym to work out, when we're lifting, and for those of you who try  to go to failure when you lift, what you're trying to do is you're trying to recruit all the motor  units that you can until you can't move that weight anymore. Then your brain's kind of like,  okay, we need to hypertrophy our motor units so that there's more strength, there's more  power with each motor unit that we choose to contract so that all or none. Now, you may  have also noticed that your brain doesn't like doing that very much. So when you try to go  to failure, it's hard, like really hard to do. You almost kind of feel a little sick to a degree.  [0:24:47]  And you're probably never really going completely to failure because your brain doesn't  like you being completely wiped out because it takes the motor units a little bit to recover,  which you know that too, that you can go to failure, walk around for a minute or two, and  then you go back and you do another set. Okay, so again, why am I bringing this all up?  09 /01/25   Page   of 8   18

SSC 2.0 - 102: Anatomy Review Part 2  Well, because the ability or the strength or the power of clenching or grinding the teeth is  going to have to do with how many motor units are recruited. Now there's a cool video on  YouTube. This is, I think, originally probably one of the very first videos to ever have a bil -  lion views. This was taken a long time ago. I bet you've seen it, but this is an educational  video on motor unit recruitment.  [0:25:46]  [video playback]  “Charlie. Charlie bit me. Charlie. That really hurt. Charlie bit me. And that really hurt, Char -  lie, and it's still hurting.”  [0:26:36]  The classic Charlie bit my finger. Now what was the difference between bite one and bite  two? Motor unit recruitment. First one, Charlie didn't utilize or didn't recruit that many motor  units. Second one he did, that one hurt. Now before we leave this topic, let's have a little  battle, if you will, of the muscles of mastication. So here's what I want you to do. You know,  viewer at home here, what I want you to do, play with me here, is I want you to clench your  teeth as hard as you can and move your jaw side to side without relaxing the clench. So  go ahead and do that. Clench your teeth as hard as you can and move your jaw side to  side without relaxing the clench. So I can see you through the lens of my camera here,  and your jaw did not go side to side. By the way, relax, relax. How come you can't move  your jaw side to side while clenching as hard as you can? Now you might be saying, well,  my teeth are in the way. But that's not it. If you were to put a tongue depressor or a piece  of metal or something between your teeth and bite as hard as you could, you still wouldn't  be able to go side to side. So it's not the cusp tips getting in the way or something like that.  [0:27:49]  What it is, is you've got the temporalis, the masseter, the medial pterygoid, all these eleva -  tors going, and then you tried to contract your lateral pterygoid to move, but your lateral  pterygoid is so small, it's like, right? It's like fighting my thigh with my pinky. It's not going to  work. Okay, here's the principle. People who are grinders have less pain than clenchers  because they're not recruiting as many motor units. You literally have to relax your eleva -  tors to a degree to move side to side, or forward. So the lateral pterygoid has gotten a lot  of bad press over the years. You may have taken courses from different, you know,  schools of thought on the lateral pterygoid is this and that. Partly that comes from that it's  so darn painful to try to get even in the neighborhood of the lateral pterygoid that people  thought, it was real tender. But also, if someone is newly grinding their teeth, then they are  activating the lateral pterygoid more than they would normally. Again, the palpation is pret -  ty tough to figure that out. But if you were to have someone protrude their jaw against your  hand or something, they may say, yeah, that's a little bit uncomfortable.  [0:29:13]  Normally, the lateral pterygoid is rarely used. This is also why many of your patients, when  their mouth's open for 20, 30 minutes, they're sore at the end. Well, that's because they  never do that. If you gave them gum to chew for 30 minutes, and they chewed gum, or  they just chew on a regular basis like we all do, that's probably not going to stress them  09 /01/25   Page   of 9   18

SSC 2.0 - 102: Anatomy Review Part 2  out too much. But to have their mouth open for 15, 20, 30 minutes, that does, because us -  ing that lateral pterygoid. So just remember that. And this is common. You know this clini -  cally, because you'll have that patient with wear on their teeth. And early on in your career,  you'd be like, you must have a lot of jaw pain and stuff. They're like, I don't know what  you're talking about. For them to move and grind their teeth, not using a lot of motor unit  recruitment. Where there are clenchers, on the other hand, they can really contract some  motor units. So clenchers will tend to have more temporalis headache, masseter pain,  things like that, than are grinders. All right, before I leave this.  [0:30:21]  And something that I've thought about more recently that's connected with this topic here,  is with motor unit recruitment and the variability of patients that you see with bruxism, and  how does that make sense? So here's what I'm getting at. Just said you have the patient  with wear and they don't have pain. And maybe that makes sense that it's because they're  not recruiting motor units as much. But here's another one that may have kind of confused  you in the past. You've got the patient, they have big old masseters, and you know that  they're clenchers, and they say they're clenchers perhaps. They're like, you know, I find  myself with my teeth together all the time. You know, you're talking to them, they're putting  their teeth together, they're pulsing their masseter. You ever notice Tom Cruise does that a  lot? You'll pick that up now in movies that he's in, he's contracting his masseters a lot. So  here, I'll use him as an example. So Tom Cruise almost assuredly never has masseter  pain. You know why? Because he's a well-trained clencher athlete, is what I like to call it.  So using a running analogy here, there's the couch potato to 5K, and then there's the  marathoner. And I'll use these with bruxer clenchers.  [0:31:56]  So the bruxer clencher who has never done it before, the couch potato, and now they are  kind of like a person getting ready to run a 5K. If you've never run and you start running,  how's it going to feel? It's going to hurt. So there's going to be parts of your feet that hurt,  that you didn't know you had muscles like that in your feet. Your legs are going to hurt,  your knees might hurt, your hips might hurt, your back might hurt. All sorts of stuff's going  to hurt because you haven't stressed your body in that way before. Now, on the other  hand, let's say you really get into running and you do your 5K and you keep on going. And  next thing you know, you're running 10Ks and half marathon, and you want to do a  marathon. And you build up, you spend six months preparing and exercising and running a  ton, and you get out there and you actually complete a marathon. Well, from a person  who's done all that, you get to the point where running 10, 15, 18 miles even, it's no big  deal.  [0:33:02]  Running a full marathon, I've never done that and not been very sore. Because when you  run over three hours, you're going to have some breakdown. But in the training where I  was running under three hours, I'd go out and run for two, two and a half hours in training.  I'd feel fine. I was a trained athlete. But now I'm actually currently, as I'm recording this, I'm  getting back into running. My twin boys want to get into doing triathlons and particularly  09 /01/25   Page   of 10   18

SSC 2.0 - 102: Anatomy Review Part 2  Xterra-type triathlons where it's mountain biking and open water swim and trail running  and stuff like that. And so I'm getting back into this. And the other day I ran four miles and I  hadn't run four miles in one time for quite some time. I'd been running two miles, three  miles, stuff like that, so four miles. And the next day had some of that tenderness in these  muscles and tissues that I've not trained for a while. Okay, back to bruxism clenchers. The  couch-to-5K bruxer-clencher is the person that is recently clenching and grinding their  teeth and they have pain. The trained athlete clencher-grinder that you may see in your  practice, they may have tooth wear, the bruxers, they may have headaches, they may  have the big masseters, but they don't have pain because they're trained athletes.  [0:34:21]  The person, on the other hand, that just recently started doing that, you don't even see any  problems, you don't see wear facets in the clencher, you don't see hypertrophied muscles  in the clencher, you don't see tooth wear in the recent bruxer, but they have pain because  they're new. Okay, so watch for that. This is why we will have patients that they start a  medication, which I'll talk about later in this series here, and the medications are what's  causing the bruxism. People that develop sleep apnea and they have an airway issue and  maybe they're protecting their airway, they start to have pain. This is why when we treat  these people for their airway issue, this is why when we figure out that it's a medication  and we change the medication, their pain goes away because we got to the etiology. Okay,  so I hope that that makes some sense and that as you continue in your practice, particular -  ly if you're a general dentist, that you're like, I get it. Okay, that's why these people, and by  the way, for sleep dentistry too, for dental sleep medicine is another frustrating thing be -  cause the people that will break the heck out of appliances almost never have pain.  [0:35:28]  Okay, they're the trained athletes. So if you could kind of pick them up in advance, then  you might be able to, you know, pick an appliance. Now, as we'll talk about later, as we get  into that, I want you to choose an appliance in that case that the appliance will break be -  fore the patient breaks, but you're going to be better at picking out, based on your big  masseters, based on this, based on the wear facets that I see that are just facets from you  clenching, you might put a lot of stress on the appliance. Maybe I'm not going to give you  this really thin appliance. Maybe I'm going to go to something like nylon. Maybe I'm going  to do something else and make some decisions based on your ability to recruit motor  units. All right, that's what that whole thing was about.  Trigeminal Nerve   [0:36:14]  All right, let's talk about the trigeminal nerve real quick. Hey, at home, get out a piece of  paper for me and do me a favor. You memorized all this in dental school once, so go  ahead and write down all of the terminal branches of the trigeminal nerve. Yeah, I couldn't  do that either if you asked me to, and I'm pretty good with anatomy, but as far as memoriz -  09 /01/25   Page   of 11   18

SSC 2.0 - 102: Anatomy Review Part 2  ing all the terminal branches which are on this slide right here, no flipping way. But here's  an interesting thing about the trigeminal nerve.   The trigeminal nerve has more connection  with our cerebral cortex of any other sensory nerve in our body. More information goes to  your brain from this sensory nerve than any other sensory nerve. So why do you think it  would be that your brain would be so concerned with information from our trigeminal  nerve? Okay, and that's a hint right there. This area that I'm covering with my hand right  there, that's the information that's being sent to your cerebral cortex. Well, you might say,  well, vision is in that area and communication is in that area and things like that that are  important to our survival and our sociality and things like that. True, all good points, but  what do you think the most important thing is? Now, some of you are saying, well, eating.  Eating is pretty important. True, but what's the most important? You're right, breathing.  Breathing. So your brain is keeping track of information from the trigeminal nerve all the  time because that is where your airway is.  [0:37:47]  And if there was something to affect our airway or block our airway, we're dead soon. So  we can go quite a while without food. We can go quite a while without water. There are  people that can't see and they live too, but nobody lives very long without air. So your  brain is constantly tracking all of that information there, and that's why the trigeminal nerve  is so important. Okay, here we have our superficial innervation of the trigeminal nerve. So  up here, up top of our scalp, that is our ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve, goes  over our eyes and all the way to the tip of our nose. Maxillary division here and up the side  of our head a little bit, and then the mandibular division here and also up the side of our  head, as you see in this drawing. So the scalp down to the tip of the nose is ophthalmic  division. Maxillary division up here into your temple and then mandibular division all here  up the side of your head, a little bit part of your ear, past the jaw joint, and down to your  chin.  Cutaneous Nerves of the Head and Neck   [0:38:52]  All right, another nut on the screen here. So if I was to put my pointer right here, if a patient  came in and pointed to that area, they would probably say, what hurts? So they point right  there, like, my jaw hurts, right? So if someone pointed right there, or if you palpated, that's  the masseter right there. If you palpated right there, you're like, yeah, that's the mandible.  That's the mandible, you'd probably be thinking, mandibular division of the trigeminal  nerve, but that would be wrong. So you see here that this is greater auricular nerve or ven -  tral rami of C2 and C3. Okay, what's this C2, C3 stuff? Okay, so this is cervical nerves.  What? Cervical nerves? So we have V1, V2, V3, and then on the jaw still, innervation from  cervical nerves. So is it possible that someone could present with jaw pain and it's due to a  neck issue? You know, maybe they were painting the ceiling at home over the weekend.  Maybe they slept weird and tweaked their neck, and now their jaw hurts. Yeah, that's defi -  09 /01/25   Page   of 12   18

SSC 2.0 - 102: Anatomy Review Part 2  nitely possible. Now, you have probably, if you're a general dentist, a restorative dentist,  you've probably come across this too because the cervical nerves can also innervate  mandibular molars.  [0:40:17]  How you would have experienced this is you were doing a crown prep on like a second  molar on the mandible and everything seems cool and you kind of get to the distal of that  tooth and then all of a sudden they're like, doc, I feel that there. And you're like, shoot, you  know, that block I just gave you must be wearing off. Seems like a little short for it's wear -  ing off and seemed to work okay on this side of your tooth, but let me give you another  block. So you give them another inferior alveolar nerve block and you give it time to soak  in. You come back in and you're like, how you doing? They're like, you got me, doc. I'm  super numb here. So lips numb, tongue's, everything's numb. You go back to prep that  tooth. Patient feels it. What the heck is that all about?  Transverse Cervical Nerve: Implications for Dental Anesthesia   [0:40:02]  So this is, again, been known a long time. And this is transverse cervical nerve, so cervical  nerves. And this paper, implications for dental anesthesia. So this was interesting. Again,  they didn't do this on hundreds of people or anything, but they were looking for this inner -  vation, this extra innervation, if you will. And so they did two different cadavers. And here in  one of two samples, there was innervation to the inferior border of the posterior mandible  through the transverse cervical nerve. Reading out loud here, these findings illustrate vari -  ations of anatomy that may account for inferior alveolar nerve block failures in posterior  mandibular teeth. Okay, so what did you do in that case when the person was still numb?  Well, you did what I call you went physician on it. So I don't know if you've ever seen this  or experienced this, but like if you or one of your kids or something like that has ever had  like a cut someplace. So if I had a cut on my arm right here and I went to the doctor and  they were preparing it for stitches, let's say, where would they give me a shot? Okay, so a  dentist would give a shot like maybe above it. Maybe they would even know the anatomy  well enough to give a shot up here. Block the whole arm. That would be kind of a dental  thing to do, right? Physicians and nurses tend to go all over it.  [0:42:33]  They’re giving shots all around it below it, distal to the cut. And you're like, well, that's not  how nerves work. I need to block the nerve up here to keep the signals from going up to  the brain. That's what you did with the tooth though, is you went physician on it. So you  went PDL, you went lingual, you went buccal, you went everywhere you could and the pa -  tient was fine. You got through the procedure. But here's the bummer is you probably didn't  know this that we're going over right now. And so you didn't explain to the patient that they  have weird anatomy. So for the rest of their life, that patient, if they ever change from you  as their dentist, the next dentist they go to, they're going to say, hey doc, I'm allergic to ep -  09 /01/25   Page   of 13   18

SSC 2.0 - 102: Anatomy Review Part 2  inephrine. Or they're going to say, hey doc, anesthetic doesn't work on me. And the doc -  tor's going to be like, what are you talking about? Anesthetic doesn't work on you. Well, I  had a dentist. They tried to do a crown prep on me and they did this procedure on my  tooth and they couldn't get me numb. So anesthetic doesn't work on me.  A Study in Human Cadavers   [0:43:34]  Okay, that's this. It was that they had this transverse cervical nerve. Here's another one,  transverse cervical and a greater auricular even of nerve distribution in the mandibular  area. Again, known for quite some time. But bottom line is you can have mandibular tooth  innervation from transverse cervical or a greater auricular nerve distribution, which is again  also part of this superficial cervical plexus. Crazy, right? So once you hit that from now on,  you will recognize, all right, this is something that Jamison talked about and you can inform  that patient that they have weird anatomy.  The Temporomandibular Joint   [0:44:18]  Okay, let's talk about the temporomandibular joint a little bit here. So these netter draw -  ings, we have our ear opening, we have our fossa and the condyle coming up and then of  course the disc is between the head of the condyle and the articular eminence. Behind the  disc is the, behind the disc tissue or the retrodiscal tissue. Out here in front, we have the  superior belly of the lateral pterygoid and the inferior belly of the lateral pterygoid. The  condyle will rotate and translate. Now, you know, there's been some discussion over the  years of is there pure rotation and translation and stuff like that?  [0:44:55]  I don't know that there is. Most people, they barely take their teeth apart. They're going to  go down and forward. Okay, almost all people, if they go from clenched to barely open, it's  down and forward a little bit. So there's going to be some rotation and translation. To fully  open, then we must translate in order to get full opening. The temporomandibular joint is  this so-called arthrogymoidal joint. This is unique in the body. We don't have other joints  like this. We have a rotation, we have a translation, and that is the arthrogymoidal. It's in -  nervated by the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve, 75% from the auricular branch  of the auricular temporal nerve and posterior deep temporal nerves and masseteric nerve,  but mostly the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve is our temporomandibular joint  innervation, excuse me. There's some suspensory ligaments associated with the joint it -  self. The joint capsule, If you have ever, you know, if you're a hunter or you've ever like  prepared a turkey or something like that and you've separated a joint, these capsules are  tough. So the capsule around the jaw joint is not weak. And when you learn how to do in -  jections into the capsule, you get to the point where you often will, you'll feel going through  09 /01/25   Page   of 14   18

SSC 2.0 - 102: Anatomy Review Part 2  the capsule if you're in the right spot. You'll get a little bit of a pop when you're injecting  through it.  [0:46:21]  And that's part of that capsule. The lateral capsule is very kind of tough, fibrous. The me -  dial is looser connective tissue. So the condyle is a little bit more protected lateral than it is  medial. The disc is having its pull put on it from the lateral pterygoid from outside to inside.  So there's the pull is towards the center. And this is why the disc will displace the way it  does. We'll talk about the disc a little bit more later when I talk about disc displacement,  but just understanding some of the anatomy here. The disc itself is not attached anterior or  posterior to the condyle, but it is attached medial and lateral. So here's the attachment lat -  eral. Here's the attachment medial. And that disc will go with the head of the condyle, but  because it's not attached front and back, it can displace anteriorly. They used to think that  it could displace posteriorly too. That's impossible because it would have to drag the later -  al pterygoid with it over the condyle. That ain't going to happen. So you may hear some  super old timers talk about a posterior disc displacement. No such thing. The only way you  could have a posterior disc displacement is if the neck of the condyle broke off. And even  then, it wouldn't make sense because there's nothing pulling this tissue back. There's no  muscle pulling the disc backwards. There's a muscle forwards. The reason that the disc  goes back when we close is because it's on the condyle. It's not a muscle back there in the  retrodiscal tissue pulling the disc back. The disc is coming back because it's just on the  head of the condyle.  Retrodiscal Tissues   [0:48:03]  Okay, I talked about the lateral capsule already. Retrodiscal tissues, full of blood vessels  and nerves. Disc itself, avascular. No blood vessels, no nerves. Retrodiscal tissues chalk  full of blood vessels and nerves, so remember that because when we take our disc and we  go forward, we go anteriorly displaced, what did we just do with the behind the disc tis -  sues? Okay? The behind the disc tissues, the retrodiscal tissues are full of blood vessels  nerves. If the disc goes forward, now those retrodiscal tissues are where the disc used to  be which is on the condyle. So the disc itself is a vascular because it was designed to  take pressure between the condyle and articular eminence. Retrodiscal tissues on the  other hand, certainly are not.  Pinto’s Ligament - Malleomandibular Ligament   [0:48:48]  Okay, Pinto's ligament. So this is a very interesting thing, and it goes back to our anatomy.  So back into our first bronchial arch. You may remember me talking about that, that the ear  ossicles were associated with the same bronchial arch as our mandible, lower lip, lower  face. Okay, all of that is from the same embryological tissues, as well as the muscles mas -  09 /01/25   Page   of 15   18

SSC 2.0 - 102: Anatomy Review Part 2  tication. So Pinto's ligament, or the malleomandibular ligament, is a connection, either an  actual or a potential connection, between the lateral pterygoid and/or condyle with the ear  ossicles. What clinical implication could that have? Ringing in the ears, a congested feel -  ing in the ear, maybe even pain? You bet. And ear symptoms and ear complaints, if you  will, are common amongst people with TMJ problems, which is another reason, as I kind of  opened this level one, level 101 here, is why so many people report to an ear, nose, and  throat doctor. Ear, nose, and throat doctors see people literally every day with ear pain or  congestion in the ear or ringing in the ear or problems like that, and they do their evalua -  tion, and they say, no, this is a TMJ problem.  [0:50:13]  I’ve talked to some ear, nose, and throat doctors who are sort of familiar with this ligament,  with this connection, but don't be terribly surprised if you talk to a ear, nose, and throat  doctor and you bring this up, malleomandibular ligament, and they're kind of like, what?  So, again, goes back to the embryology of this. Now, here's my little test to see if maybe  you have this or not. This is not a perfect test, but let's go ahead and play with me here a  little bit. So, if where you are right now, there's some background noise, so a hum. We  have pretty good microphone systems and stuff like this here, but maybe your computer is  giving a little bit of a hum. If you're listening to this with headphones or something like that  or just with your computer, maybe your air conditioning is on. If in your environment right  now there is a little bit of a hum, a background noise, tune into that background noise, and  then here's what I want you to do. I want you to tune into the background noise and then  clench your teeth and relax.  [0:51:19]  Clench your teeth and relax. And see if clenching your teeth changes the background  noise. Go ahead and try that. Okay, what'd you find out? So, if when you clench your  teeth, the background noise changes, you're normal. You know how I know you're normal?  Because when I clench my teeth, the background noise changes, and I am the definition of  normal. So you're like, yeah, no you aren't, Jamison. But seriously, when I clench my  teeth, the background noise changes. So maybe yours does too, maybe it doesn't. Maybe  you've got to try it in a different environment. But what I believe is happening there is when  I brace it, I am tensing this malleomandibular ligament, which is making it so my ear ossi -  cles can't move as much, which dampens the noise in my case. I do the same test with  ringing in the ears. So if you have ringing in the ear, and you can clench your teeth or open  your jaw, or protrude your jaw, or do whatever that's going to move the mandible there,  and it changes the ringing, then maybe the ringing in your ears has to do with this malleo -  mandibular ligament. Maybe in that case, if you treated, if they had also jaw pain and  things like that, that might actually help with the ringing in the ears, if it can just modulate it.  [0:52:50]  Not make it better necessarily, but just change it. So you at home, if you have tinnitus, and  you can modulate that tinnitus by clenching your teeth or opening your jaw, it might be re -  lated to some possibly inflammation in that area that could theoretically respond. Now,  speaking about that briefly, because I don't go into detail on this anywhere else in the se -  09 /01/25   Page   of 16   18

SSC 2.0 - 102: Anatomy Review Part 2  ries here, people with ringing in the ears, with congested feeling in the ear, with dampened  hearing, they have a hearing test and it's normal, but they don't feel like they can hear as  well. Those people, if they also have other TMJ symptoms, if they have clicking and pop -  ping in particular, then I almost guarantee that their ear symptoms are going to get better.  So if you think about this again, so here we have on our malleomandibular ligament here,  that's the disc right here, right? So if this disc is anteriorly displaced, so we've pulled that  forward, that's going to put tension on this malleomandibular ligament, right? And that  could change their perception of hearing or cause these other issues. And if you get the  disc back into place, then it's going to take that stress off of that malleomandibular liga -  ment, and that could make a difference, right?  [0:54:08]  But if they just have the ear symptoms and no disc displacements, they have normal range  of motion, they can eat beef jerky three meals a day, so they have no dysfunction, they are  totally fine, it's rare that there's going to be a connection. So what I typically do in those  cases, I'll give you a little clinical pearl right now, a treatment pearl, is I would give them an  aqualizer and have them wear that aqualizer and see if it makes their symptoms any dif -  ferent. Notice I didn't say better, just different. Does wearing an aqualizer make the ringing  worse? Does it make it better? Does it change the tone? Does it do anything like that?  Okay, if it changes, then I think, okay, maybe we're messing with the right thing. Okay, so  that's the malleomandibular ligament. Again, kind of this connection here and why there  are so commonly, in my opinion, this is why there are commonly ear-related symptoms  connected with TMJ problems. Here's an article on this just kind of showing that malleo -  mandibular ligament there. So again, this is so-called Pinto's ligament and that connection.  So this is the, so you see a couple different things here.  [0:55:25]  So DML, disco-mandibular ligament, and that's the connection from the disc to the  malleus, so the disco-mallear ligament. Like I said, if the disc is displaced, then maybe  that's putting tension on that, maybe that's what's going on there. Okay, interesting stuff,  right? And there's also some studies on this relatively recent, so it's always kind of crazy in  anatomy when you're looking at something that's not hundreds of years old as far as the  literature is concerned, but here 2017, temporal mandibular joint disorders as a cause of  oral fullness. That's what I was talking about before, that kind of sensation of fullness in  your ear. Again, they'll go to the ear, nose, and throat doctor and the ear, nose, and throat  doctor won't find anything wrong. Their hearing test will be normal, things like that, 2019  study impact of TMD joint complaints on tinnitus-related distress, same thing. So I believe  that these things are coming from this malleomandibular ligament. One more time, if you  have patients with this or you yourself or a family member, my kind of rule of thumb on this  is if they can modify that by moving their jaw, clenching their teeth, posturing their jaw,  modify it, not make it better.  [0:56:44]  Please, please, please get that clear there. If someone says, yeah, I have this fullness in  my ear, and they push their jaw forward, and they're like, that makes it worse. Good. Okay,  09 /01/25   Page   of 17   18

SSC 2.0 - 102: Anatomy Review Part 2  that means we're messing with the right thing. I've got ringing in my ears. If I clench my  teeth, it makes it way louder. Good. That means we're messing with the right thing. On the  other hand, if they have these symptoms and they do whatever with their jaw, they do  everything they can, open wide, posture, clench, grind, whatever, and it's like that makes  no difference at all, probably not related to the malleomandibular ligament.  [outro music]  09 /01/25   Page   of 18   18

