SSC 2.0 -   111: ODI, Sleep Stages & Sleep Hygiene  SSC 2.0   Level 1  111: ODI, Sleep Stages & Sleep Hygiene  [intro music]  Oxygen Saturation   [0:00:12]  All right, let's talk about oxygen saturation. So if you are at sea level, your oxygen satura -  tion should approach 100. And if you're higher up like I am, so where I'm standing right  now is at about 5,500 feet. This is my home. That's where my studio is. So my oxygen sat -  uration level will be usually less than 99. It'll probably be around 96-ish at this elevation. If I  was to go skiing, which I actually happen to do today, I would be at over 9,000 feet and my  blood oxygen level would be a little bit lower. Bottom line is our blood oxygen should stay  above 90 unless you're up at a 14,000 foot peak or something in Colorado. If you're living  at a normal kind of elevation, anywhere from sea level to say 5,000, 6,000 feet like I live,  you're going to stay above 90. Now with obstructive sleep apnea, you can desaturate. A  so-called mild problem is just dipping down into the 80s. A moderate problem is dipping in  the low 80s and a severe problem is anything below 80. Now put this in a context as well  because many of you watching this will do sedation, conscious sedation or IV sedation.  [0:01:31]  And if you do sedation in your office and even if you don't, you know about this. You will  have that pulse oximeter on the patient's finger, right? You'll have the pulse oximeter there.  And if you have ever been in a hospital with a pulse oximeter on your finger in recovery or  whatever, what happens if your O2 sat goes below 90? An alarm goes off. If you were  treating a patient and their O2 sat went below 90, what would you do? Would you just  keep on working? You're doing some restorative case on someone who wanted to be se -  dated and you're doing a bunch of different things on them and that goes below 90 and  you're just like, yeah, I'm sure they'll be fine. No way. You're going to kind of take alert.  You're going to stop what you're doing. You're going to see what the heck's going on. You  might kind of like, hey, hey, Jamison, take a deep breath. You might give me a little sternal  rub. You might do something like that and be like, all right, let's get you breathing here.  Well, what if I continue to drop into the low 80s?  [0:02:31]  All right, now you're going to probably kind of freak out. If I was sedated IV, you might be  giving reversal drugs. If I was orally sedated with medication, you're trying to wake me up.  You're trying to get me to really breathe. You're thrusting the chin forward. You're doing all  the stuff to try to get that airway. What if I was to continue dropping into the 70s? You  might be like having somebody call 911 and getting the bag ready, right? So people sleep  apnea, they do this every night. And you'll a little bit get brazen or you won't be as respon -  09/01/25   Page   of 1   14

SSC 2.0 -   111: ODI, Sleep Stages & Sleep Hygiene  sive to this. You'll get dulled to it because it happens so much. And you're like, yeah, man,  yeah, look, you're spending, you know, 12% of the night below 88. 88 happens to be the  kind of the line that they usually use on sleep studies to whether it's good or bad is how  much time you were above 88 and how much time you were below 88. Depends on the  sleep lab, but that's a common. And you'll see a lot of this. You'll be like, wow, that's a lot.  [0:03:36]  Okay, here's the point. The point is that oxygen desaturation is also delayed. This is one of  the reasons that if you do sedation, one of the reasons you immediately act, you're not  kind of sitting around waiting for something is you know that's behind, you're behind the  curve already. If you don't know this, then I strongly encourage you to get a pulse oximeter  and you can get these on Amazon for probably under $50 and put it on your finger. And if  you haven't done this already, I can't imagine anybody having a pulse oximeter around and  having not done this because this was the first thing that I would ever do after I opened a  new pulse oximeter. But if you've never done this, please do this. And that is put the pulse  oximeter on, breathe deeply, get it up to whatever it's going to go to 98, 99, let's say, and  then hold your breath as long as you can and hold your breath and watch it and hold your  breath and watch the readout and hold your breath and hold your breath and hold your  breath and hold your breath until you can not hold your breath a second  [0:04:38]  Longer and note that it probably didn't even drop a point and maybe it dropped one point  and you just held your breath for over a minute and it won't drop. Crazy, right? Then go  ahead and breathe again and watch it. And what you'll see happen is you'll be recovering  breathing and then it's going to drop because it takes a while for that lack of oxygen to get  to your fingertip. Okay, so that oxygen desaturation is lagging behind the real time of  what's going on, which is why in a hospital setting or in your clinic, if you're sedating  somebody, you kind of freak out a little bit because you know that that measurement is ac -  tually wrong. It's higher. So they just dropped into the 80s and you're like, oh shoot, they're  probably four or five points lower than what I'm seeing on that readout right there. We bet -  ter do something right now because that oxygen desaturation curve, if you remember that,  it kind of goes and then it falls off a cliff. So as soon as they get to a point, they fall off a  cliff. It doesn't just go down in a linear fashion.  Oxygen Saturation Studies   [0:05:48]  Okay, that's oxygen saturation. Now I'm going to go a little out of order here a bit and we're  going to talk about oxygen saturation with some studies. So just talked about pulse oxime -  try, things like that. And this study back in 2021, the value of oxygen desaturation index or  ODI for diagnosing obstructive sleep apnea. So systematic review, they looked at a bunch  of studies. So eight studies were looked at, a bunch of patients there. Well, eight studies  made the criteria anyway for them to do this systematic review. Five studies compared  09/01/25   Page   of 2   14

SSC 2.0 -   111: ODI, Sleep Stages & Sleep Hygiene  ODI and AHI simultaneously. Three had a week to two months between assessments.  Okay, so one or five of these studies, they were doing an ODI and AHI at the same time.  Three had time that one was AHI, one was ODI. Sensitivities range from 32% to 98.5%,  whereas specificities ranged from 47.7% to 98%. That's kind of a whopping difference.  Now let's describe that really quick because even though I got a master's degree in cranio -  facial pain from Tufts and had to take stats and learn about the literature and learn about  sensitivity and specificity and all that kind of stuff, still confuses me to this day.  [0:07:11]  So let's kind of talk about this. So you have your test results. Your true negative is sensitiv -  ity and true positive is specificity. So I heard this said once that like sensitivity is being  sensitive to the disease, that they have it. So a true negative means they don't have the  disease. So if you had high sensitivity, you're sensitive to those with the disease, that the  true negatives are figured out. Specificity is it's specific for the disease. So here, true posi -  tive, if you had a high specificity, then you know that you're very likely that that person has  that disease. So here the definition at the top, sensitivity is the probability that the test will  indicate disease among those with the disease. Okay, it's sensitive to you having the dis -  ease. Specificity is the fraction of those without the disease who will have a negative test  result. Okay, we're specific. Those without the disease, they're going to test negative. So a  good test, you kind of want in the middle there. So a good test will have some false nega -  tives and some false positives, but this sensitivity and specificity, you can't have super high  sensitivity without having really bad specificity and vice versa.  [0:08:47]  So to back up now here a little bit, you see that the sensitivities and specificities are kind of  all over the place with this ODI versus AHI. Okay, going on reading, starting significance,  significant heterogeneity was present. Okay, not homogeneity, heterogeneity, meaning that  AHI and ODI weren't usually the same. However, four studies reporting data for a 4% oxy -  gen desaturation index at greater than 15 events or AHI per hour, the specificity for diag -  nosing OSA ranged from 75 to 98. So now we're getting better. Only one study reported  the positive predictive value, and that was 97%. Well, that's pretty good. So positive pre -  dictive value is how likely is this test to positively predict the disease, and that's quite high.  Direct oxygen desaturation index and apnea-popnea index comparisons were not made  because of different hypopnea scoring, different oxygen desaturation categories, and dif -  ferent category for grading OSA severity. Just this past weekend, I was teaching a course,  and it was a relatively beginner course. I was teaching this at Glidewell, but someone  came to the course that this is all she does for her career. She only does dental sleep  medicine, and she had heard about me or something like that and thought, oh, I'll go check  out the Spencer guy.  [0:10:11]  And so she comes to the course, and she asked questions like, well, on that study, was it a  4% desaturation or a 3% desaturation? And that's important to know also when you're go -  ing through these studies. So Medicare looks at a 4% desaturation in order to call some -  thing a hypopnea, whereas some other insurance companies will allow a 3% desaturation.  09/01/25   Page   of 3   14

SSC 2.0 -   111: ODI, Sleep Stages & Sleep Hygiene  So to say that another way, if you're kicking along at 94% oxygen saturation, that's your  normal O2 sat Medicare would say you need to be below 90 for it to count as a hypopnea,  whereas Blue Cross of your state might say, well, if they get below 91, that counts. That  can make a huge difference, right? Because if the person snaps out of it quicker and gets  their blood oxygen back up, they are less likely to desaturate. Also, if you have more  events or shorter events, then you would have higher AHI, but only by definition. So that  becomes tough. So it becomes sort of harder to have a true hypopnea if you add in there  not just the 30 to 50% reduction in airflow, but also that it has to have a desaturation with  it.  [0:11:35]  Many, many times by insurance companies, that is the definition. So again, check this out  going into conclusion. So based on currently published studies consideration should be  given for diagnosing adult OSA with a 4% ODI greater than 15 events an hour. And for  recommending further evaluation for diagnosing OSA with a 4% ODI greater than 10  events an hour. Okay, so we should be thinking about this and recommending diagnosis if  they have this criteria following their screening with oximetry maybe indicated for the de -  tection of OSA in select patients. Now who cares? So here's why I bring this stuff up, is  one of one of the things I'm known for is I'm low the BS guy, and BS stands for BS, but it  also stands for buying stuff. I don't love you just buying stuff for the sake of buying stuff.  I've already bought all the suff, okay? We had multiple known impulse oximeters in our  practice and we would use them on everybody. We had multiple home sleep testing de -  vices and we would use them on everybody until we learned what we needed to learn.  Now, you can buy those things and learn those lessons yourself or you can just learn from  me having already learned those lessons. So Cameron runs my Boise practice Kevin runs  my Salt Lake practice.  [0:13:03]  They've never owned those things because I already learned the lessons and I was just  able to teach them that hey, we don't need that. If the person is snoring and they say that  their bed partner says, they stop breathing when they sleep, that's enough, that's good  enough. Now we're gonna refer them over to the sleep doctor and they are gonna decide  to do a sleep study or not and the sleep doctor is gonna run the show or I'm gonna send  them to a primary care doctor, and the primary care doctor is gonna decide if they get a  sleep study or not, and they're gonna get a sleep study and I don't have to hassle of first  buying all this stuff and then sending it with patients and then managing getting it back and  having people break it or having people forget to send it back and stuff like that, big has -  sle. So I don't do it. So, that is one of my reasons. Now again from the studies, yes, oxy -  gen desaturation index can be helpful, but I don't encourage you or anyone else as a den -  tist to use it as a screening tool because it's not sensitive enough, it's not specific enough.  [0:14:05]  And if the person doesn't desaturate and you're like, oh, you must be fine. And then we  find out later that they have sleep apnea and you missed it because the test wasn't sensi -  tive enough for it, then that's a bummer. So I would rather put that on our medical col -  09/01/25   Page   of 4   14

SSC 2.0 -   111: ODI, Sleep Stages & Sleep Hygiene  leagues, let them do the tests that they want to. For example, in Idaho, as I'm recording  this, they still do tons of in-lab studies, tons. Whereas in Utah, they rarely do in-lab studies.  Well, I shouldn't say it that way. They rarely do in-lab studies at first. So people have to  kind of fail a home sleep test before they get an in-lab study. And that's kind of an insur -  ance rule. But we let the doctors do all that. We do not have, I take that back, I have a  home sleep testing unit in my Salt Lake practice that we never use because we inherited it  from another doctor. We actually technically had to buy it from another doctor when we  took over his patient base. Boise practice, as the things broke, we never replaced them.  You don't have to buy this stuff either.  Sleep Stages - Brain Waves   [0:15:06]  You can just kind of learn from others. Now let's talk about sleep stages. We have non-  REM sleep and REM sleep. Non-REM sleep is broken into N1, N2, and N3. And then we  have REM sleep. These are brainwaves. Brainwaves were discovered in the 30s. They  saw that the brain had these different waves during different times of the night. And this is  when they discovered that there was stuff going on when we sleep. We weren't just kind of  like in this state of unconsciousness. There was stuff going on in our brain. So at the top  here, we have relaxed wakefulness. Here we have stage 1. Stage 1, if you're kind of going  to prep for your board exam, this will probably be on your board exam. Stage 1 has theta  waves. Those are things that you look for in stage 1 sleep. Stage 2 sleep has stuff called  sleep spindles and K complexes. So sleep spindles and K complexes, those are hallmark  for stage 2 brainwaves. Stage 3, and you'll note on this thing from 2007, it says stages 3  and 4. And back in 2007, you had four stages of sleep.  [0:16:21]  Now you just have three. So 3 and 4 were combined into 3. And that has what are called  delta waves. So this is also called delta sleep or slow wave sleep or deep sleep. So stage  3 or N3, delta wave sleep, slow wave sleep, deep sleep, that's all N3. And then REM, brain  waves look like this, which is fairly similar to stage 1 and or relaxed wakefulness, yeah? So  we have these real short waves, and the brain is active during REM sleep, and we'll talk a  second about what the body's doing, but the brain is rather active in REM sleep.  N1 - N3 (Stage 1-3)   [0:17:11]  So in stage 1 sleep, this is so-called light sleep, about 4 to 5% of your total sleep time, it  increases as we get older. We got this little graphic from Sleep Foundation down here, and  you see you've got N1 is indicated as a relatively small piece of that pie, N2 that we'll talk  about in a second, N3 REM, and then you've got your light sleep, deep sleep, and vivid  dreaming, so that's kind of a nice little graphic. You might use that with your patients to  09/01/25   Page   of 5   14

SSC 2.0 -   111: ODI, Sleep Stages & Sleep Hygiene  show them these different stages of sleep and how they interact or how they relate to each  other.  [0:17:48]  N2   Sleep, as the graphic also shows, about 50% of your normal sleep time, restful sleep,  good stuff happens during N2 sleep. We'll learn more about that in the Why We Sleep  book. N3, stage 3 sleep, this is deep sleep, delta or slow wave sleep, about 10 to 20% of  our total sleep time, decreases with age, above 40 to 50% in children to total absence by  age 40? Holy cow! 40? Now, granted, there's probably a few of you that are under 40 and  you're thinking, yeah, 40's pretty old, I get it, that makes sense. But for those of us that are  over 40, we're like, oh my gosh, is that why my wife takes her pillow everywhere she  goes? How many of you at home watching this take your pillow when you travel? Okay, I  see you, I'm judging you, through the camera right now, if you do this. Because you know  what? My wife, when we go places, since basically dental school, any place that I've taken  my wife, the hotel had pillows. You know maybe a few places there during dental school  when we were very poor, that maybe they didn't. But now they do. As a matter of fact,  most of the places I take my wife nowadays, they have a pillow menu, for crying out loud.  [0:19:12]  You know, do you want the goose down pillow? Do you want the feather-free pillow? Do  you want the lavender pillow? What pillow do you want? Do you want the thick pillow or  the thin pillow? Do you want the hypoallergenic foam pillow? Right? I mean, that's kind of  where we're hanging, but she takes her own pillow, and a lot of you do too, and how  come? Because you sleep better. But I'll bet you 50 bucks that when you were 18 years  old, you could sleep anywhere, any surface, anytime, and be just fine. So what was the  switch? Well, the switch was that you got older. And as you got to your 40s and beyond,  deep sleep started to become a bigger deal for you. And sometimes, unfortunately, this  hits you well before 40, it's just statistically that once you get in your 40s, you're likely to  have this deep sleep go down. So our deep sleep, we usually have more in the first third of  our sleep cycle, and also this is where growth hormone is produced, and deep sleep is a  significant part in children's sleep because they are growing. Okay, so deep sleep, super  important.   Now I'll point out something now for you to burn into your memory. If you don't  get deep sleep, you won't heal. If you don't get deep sleep, your body won't heal. Your  muscles won't recover. So you'll hurt. So people that don't get deep sleep tend to hurt.  Okay, keep that in mind.  Systematic Review: Auditory Stimulation and Sleep   [0:20:43]  So what could we do to increase our deep sleep if you are of that age where this is poten -  tially being reduced for you? Well, there's something called auditory stimulation or, in other  words, noise. So listening to white noise or pink noise or things like that has been shown  to improve deep sleep. So this study in '22, 34 studies reported results, 1,100 people,  09/01/25   Page   of 6   14

SSC 2.0 -   111: ODI, Sleep Stages & Sleep Hygiene  three categories of intervention, white noise, pink noise, or a multi-audio combination of  white, pink, music, or silence. 19 studies had positive findings in terms of improving sleep  outcomes, six with white noise, nine with pink noise, and four with multi-audio. So you may  have seen commercials or whatever for different colors of noise. The colors of noise are  wavelengths. So pink noise and these other colors of noise have been shown to improve  sleep. Pink noise specifically has been shown to improve deep sleep.  Simply Noise - Pink Noise Study   [0:21:44]  So this is an app that my family uses, which is called Simply Noise. It's free and we use  pink noise. Now, heads up. So in preparing for these recordings here, and if you have  been a member of Special Study Club for a long time and you're re-watching these videos,  this is new. So 2023, they looked at pink noise and check this out. Overnight exposure to  pink noise could jeopardize sleep-dependent insight and pattern detection. Yikes. So they  said in this study, overall, our results suggest that open-loop pink noise during sleep may  be detrimental to insight formation and creativity due to the alterations it causes in normal  sleep architecture. Here's my theory. My theory on that is that it creates more deep sleep  and perhaps at the expense of REM sleep. So in REM sleep is where we're going to do  more of this insight and brain type of stuff. So maybe we're getting more deep sleep,  maybe at the expense of REM sleep. Ever since I read this study, we changed our pink  noise diet. So we don't listen to pink noise every night. We do still have the pink noise on. I  will particularly use the pink noise when I'm traveling and particularly if I'm in a noisy envi -  ronment.  [0:23:02]  For example, I don't go out to Boston as much anymore, but I used to go out there multiple  times a year after I started the Tufts program. And I was part of that for like 12 years. And if  you've been to Tufts dental school, it's right downtown sort of, but it's right by a hospital.  And so there's ambulance traffic throughout the night and it was noisy. And so if you didn't  have this, you either wore earplugs or you would have your sleep disrupted. If I ever travel  and I've got that going on, then I'm going to have pink noise. Also, if I travel to the East  Coast or if I travel to Europe or something like that or Australia, I'm going to use pink noise  to help get me more of that deep sleep and help shift my circadian rhythm a bit. But ever  since this 2023 study, I don't use it every night anymore because I do need that insight and  creativity. Pretty important to what I do. Okay, now let's talk about REM sleep. REM sleep,  rapid eye movement sleep. That's where the REM comes from. Observed eye move -  ments, 20 to 25% of your total sleep time.  REM Sleep   [0:24:13]  09/01/25   Page   of 7   14

SSC 2.0 -   111: ODI, Sleep Stages & Sleep Hygiene  Your body is basically paralyzed. So you have a tonus of the muscles and this is why sleep  apnea will be worse during REM sleep. So the ultimate worst case scenario for having or  the most likely scenario for having sleep apnea would be supine, on your back, REM  sleep. If you're on your back, got the gravity there, and then you've lost muscle tone,  supine REM sleep. So watch for that also on the studies. So sometimes will treat people  with oral appliance therapy and because we're protecting their airway, they'll get more  REM sleep. But because they get more REM sleep, they may have more apneas. Now,  okay, I know that seems crazy, but what does your brain care more about? REM or air?  Well, air. However, if you protect the airway enough that they can start getting some REM  sleep, they might have apneas. And remember the definitions and stuff. So it may not be  the same type of apneas that they had before, but it still gets counted and so it doesn't  look that good. So you might change them from the 25 to 20, but then you look into the de -  tails and you're like, yeah, but look, before they had 3% REM sleep and now they have  20% REM sleep.  [0:25:30]  I wonder if that's why their apneas, those 10 second apneas are a little bit more. Okay, so  check that out. Mind's very active. This is where you dream. This is where you do problem  solving. REM sleep, super duper important. All right, so I had you kind of put into your  brain there that if the patient doesn't get deep sleep, they will hurt. Okay, they'll hurt. If they  don't get REM sleep, they will be mentally fatigued. So no deep sleep, physically fatigued  and or in pain. REM sleep, no REM sleep or limited REM sleep, mentally fatigued. Can't  remember stuff, difficulty finding words, not having that kind of insight and creativity, having  problems with stuff like that, brain fog, all those sorts of things. That would likely be a lack  of REM sleep. So you'd be looking at their REM sleep levels. We go in and out of these  different cycles throughout the night. It's not unusual for people to wake up during the night  even.  Sleep Cycles Through the Night   [0:26:36]  This graphic is okay with this, but we see that our N1 sleep is just right at the beginning,  which makes sense. We have these bars of N2 sleep throughout the night. Note how they  get a little longer here. Note how the N3, the bluish bars, is more right at the beginning and  then gets less as the night goes on, whereas REM is the opposite. REM starts off just a  little bit here and then gets more as we sleep. This is why you will often wake up in a  dream. That first REM cycle should hit about an hour and a half, 90 minutes into sleep. If  you know somebody that goes to sleep and they immediately go into dreaming, they im -  mediately go into REM, that's usually a sign of sleep deprivation. They're not getting  enough sleep, and so their brain is kind of like, hey, got to get this REM sleep so our brain  works. Brain working, pretty important. And so the brain will kind of prioritize REM to a de -  gree, and so they'll just jump right into REM sleep. That's a sign of sleep deprivation. Deep  09/01/25   Page   of 8   14

SSC 2.0 -   111: ODI, Sleep Stages & Sleep Hygiene  sleep is going to be first. If you were to stay awake for a long time or one night and not go  to bed until like 2 in the morning, and you normally go to bed at, say, 10:30 or 11, you'll  usually lose more deep sleep than you would REM sleep because you would have your  circadian rhythm is used to you getting the REM sleep at 4 in the morning, and that would  still happen.  [0:27:56]  It's not going to shift the whole thing. That's your circadian rhythm, your sleep cycle  throughout the night. If you have a tracker, like this is a Garmin watch, if you have an  Apple watch, stuff like that, then you know when these cycles occur. Every morning I look  at mine with my Garmin watch, and it will show me the light and the deep and the REM  sleep and when they were and give me little bars just like this graphic here. Mentioning the  circadian rhythm, so our circadian or biological clock is based on light, so it's entrained to  this 24-hour day with light and dark being these big clues. Light is the most powerful cue. If  light hits your retina, your brain says it's day. If it is dark, then your brain starts releasing  melatonin and allows you to go into sleep. This is one of the reasons, by the way, if you've  ever seen me, if you were originally introduced to me at a dental meeting, like at the Hin -  man or Chicago Midwinter or ADA or Greater New York or CDA or Texas or wherever, if  that was the first time you ever saw me, more than likely my room was more lit than any of  the other lectures you went to at that dental conference because I won't lecture, well, won't  is too strong.  [0:29:24]  I strive to never lecture in a dark room because when you put people in a dark room, even  though you got light coming off the screen, so to speak, they're more likely to fall asleep.  And you may know this too from going to the movies or something like that. If it's not a  great movie, you're going to go to sleep. So dark, your brain's like, hey, cool, nighttime,  light, your brain's like, hey, daytime. This is obviously a problem for us too because we live  in almost constant light nowadays. And particularly in the winter, if you're in North America,  and summer if you're in the Southern Hemisphere, that screws stuff up because the sun's  going to go down at 6 o'clock, let's say, but then you're going to be around artificial light  until time to go to bed. And then we expect our brain to be like, okay, well, computer, com -  puter, computer, 10:30, 11, 11:15, light, light, light, light, light, shut the lid, all right, go to  sleep now, brain. Kind of doesn't work that way, right? If you've ever noticed, it's like bright  and then it gets gradually less bright as the sun goes down. Kind of how we're built to have  that. It never just goes like sunny, sunny, sunny, dark. That's only during an eclipse. So  that's not what we're trained to do, entrained to do. So we should help our brain with that  by not exposing ourselves to light all the time, particularly when we're trying to sleep.  Sleep Hygiene (Sleep)   [0:30:51]  09/01/25   Page   of 9   14

SSC 2.0 -   111: ODI, Sleep Stages & Sleep Hygiene  And that's a nice segue into hygiene, but we're not going to talk about this kind of hygiene.  We're going to talk about sleep hygiene. So here is my acronym for good sleep hygiene,  and it should be easy to remember because it is sleep is the acronym. S is for sleepy time,  L light, E environment, E exercise, P priority. Let's go through those. So first is sleepy time.  Try to have a regular bedtime, give yourself enough time for sleep. Who do we tell to do  this? Kids. Would it shock you if what's good for kids is also good for adults? Maybe it  would, right? So we again, I mentioned before that if you're into any athletics or stuff like  that, you would have read about this. Like, hey, it's really, really good for you, really, really  healthy, have a regular bedtime, give yourself plenty of time for sleep.  [0:31:46]  It's fascinating to me. I've followed some endurance athletes over the years, read some  books on them, stuff like that, and they're a lot of kind of world-class athletes. Their job is  basically eat, sleep, and work out, and then, of course, race from time to time. But they re -  ally prioritize sleep and, of course, their nutrition, and it's very common for these world-  class level athletes to take a nap. Okay, they'll get their usually eight-plus hours of sleep,  sometimes nine or even 10 hours of sleep. They get up, they usually go for a workout, they  get some nutrition, stuff like that. Not uncommon at all for them to take a nap in the after -  noon, go to a second workout, get their nutrition in the evening, and then go to bed for like  10 hours. Sleep, super critical. Give yourself enough time for sleep is important as well.  Sleep Hygiene (Light)   [0:32:49]  Okay, next is light. Limit exposure to bright light, including computers, iPads, your phone,  all that stuff for at least the last hour before bed. Again, we were not hardwired here to be  exposed to light and then all of a sudden just turned off, right? And this is a new phe -  nomenon, right? So I know you may be watching this and you're like, well, Jamison's an  old guy, so okay, boomer, for you, not even close to being a boomer. Don't give me that.  Matter of fact, that reminds me, I was speaking recently, and this guy comes up and he's  talking to me. And he's like, yeah, we're probably about the same age. And I'm looking at  him thinking, there's no way I'm as old as you. And then finally, I think I asked, when did  you graduate? I don't think I asked how old you are. Maybe I did. But it turns out the guy's  like 65. I'm 55 right now as I'm recording this. And I was a little bit, and I think I even said  to him, like, you thought I was 65? How dare you? I know you get to a certain age and it  becomes very difficult to know if someone's 50 or 60 or 70. I mean, there's some great,  great shape 70-year-olds and some, ridden hard and put away wet 50-year-olds out there.  [0:34:05]  So I know it becomes difficult. But anyway, bottom line is what I was going with there is  when I was a kid, I didn't have a cell phone in my hand. I mean, I didn't have a cell phone  in my hand until after I was married. OK, we didn't have a cell phone in dental school. Did  we? No, I don't think we did. I had a pager. When my wife was pregnant with our twins, I  09/01/25   Page   of 10   14

SSC 2.0 -   111: ODI, Sleep Stages & Sleep Hygiene  had a pager that was second year of dental school so that she could get a hold of me in an  emergency. No one was rocking their, their big phone with the big antenna on it or some -  thing like that in 1996. We started getting that stuff in the very, very last of the 90s and  then 2000s. Laptop. Did I have a laptop in dental? No, I didn't have a laptop in dental  school, right? I had a computer at my house, and it was this big. And I had a dial-up mo -  dem and crap. I probably did spend some time on the computer at nighttime, and there  were indeed video games, and we did have TV back then. But it wasn't the same, right?  [0:35:08]  It wasn't that type of particularly blue light hitting your eyeballs all the time. That was not  how we lived. Whereas now, my children, they've grown up with this. And it's, again,  whether you believe in evolution or design or whatever, it doesn't matter. We can all be on  the same page here that this is not cool, right? That there's nothing about our biology and  physiology that says, yeah, this is great for us to have all this light exposure when we're  actually trying to sleep. Now, hopefully you know this already, but if you have Apple type of  devices like iPhone and stuff like that, night shift should be selected on your device. And  Android, that's called the blue light filter. So on all of my Apple stuff, I've got that night shift  on. So my phone, my laptop will turn off the blue light aspect of those screens when the  sun goes down. Now, that is better than nothing. So it's not like, okay, I'm solved now. I got  my blue light filter on. I'm sure I'll be fine. Or I wear blue light glasses. Yeah, that helps.  [0:36:20]  It helps tremendously. So anything you can do, blue light glasses, night shift, blue light fil -  ter, all that stuff, do it all because it can help your sleep. And not just your sleep, but all  sorts of other stuff, including your blood glucose level. I know that's crazy, but Google this.  Getting sleep right has a powerful effect on all these different things.  Sleep Hygiene (Environment)   [0:36:47]  All right. The E is for environment. Keep your sleep environment dark, quiet, and comfort -  able. So this top one here is to indicate a dark room. So I don't actually even like the light  outside there. That'd be a problem. So you would get some blackout shades. But if I just  had a black square up here, you wouldn't know that was a bedroom. So bottom line, dark  environment. If you have your phone charging right next to your head, which actually I  must confess I do, which is probably stupid, but again, a lot of us do that, right? Because  that's your alarm and it's your whole life there right next to you. And be careful with any  type of lights, any type of LEDs and stuff like that.  [0:37:25]  I don't have that. So I have a dark environment I sleep in. And if I'm ever in an environment  that I'm not in control over the darkness, so usually when I travel, I will take a sleep mask  so that I know that I'm going to be able to have that darkness that is so important. Quiet  environment. So if you have a spouse that's a snorer, that's going to be a problem. You  09/01/25   Page   of 11   14

SSC 2.0 -   111: ODI, Sleep Stages & Sleep Hygiene  need to get that taken care of. And then last, what's this? Okay, what kind of environment  is this? So note over here it says comfortable. So it didn't say cold, didn't say cool. Okay,  but probably most of you said a cool environment. And then one or two you weirdos said a  warm environment. No offense to the weirdos. And this could be a problem because in my  experience, the people that are like, well, I kind of like it on the warm side when I sleep,  they probably have a bed partner who likes it on the cool slash cold side. And usually the  person that likes it warmer is just told, well, use more blankets. But good news for you,  there are things that you can buy for this that can make up for this dual zone climate con -  trol need that you have for your bed.  [0:38:40]  So we have dual zone climate control. Most of you probably have that in your car. And so if  you're driving someplace and your spouse wants it a little warmer, a little cooler, they can  control their side of the car. Pretty cool. And I use that analogy on purpose because next  time you do that, play with your thermostat a little bit in your car, and you will notice that a  degree or two makes a big difference. So the difference between 72 and 70 is cold, and 72  and 74 is sweltering hot. So just a few degrees different makes a big difference. What  these things do is they change the temperature of your bed. Now, this makes a massive  difference for me personally. I sleep hot, and so we have the windows open all the time. As  I'm recording this, we're shifting from winter into spring, so it's not super cold outside any -  more at night. It's still cold. It's in, like, 40s right now at nighttime, which is pretty cold. And  I've gone from having one window open to two windows open in our bedroom to get flow  through there to cool it down a bit. But then I also have my chili pad. So chili pad cube is  what I have.  [0:39:50]  Chili pad, bed jet, eight sleep. There's a whole bunch of these out there. I like the water-  cooled ones better than the air-cooled ones. I've had the air-cooled. Air-cooled just doesn't  do it for me. Air can only do so much, whereas water can make a big difference. So on  mine, it will take the cold side, so it will do either. It will do cold or hot. So it will cool or  heat. It will take you down to 55 degrees, which is burr cold, or up to 115 degrees on the  warm side if you like your bed partner medium rare. So consider that. These are not  cheap, $1,000-ish, and some a little bit less, some a little bit more. In the spirit of the mat -  tress salesman, you're going to spend a third of your life in bed, probably okay to spend  some money there. I tend to believe that. So my wife and I, we have a sleep number bed,  which I love, and it's the hospital kind that you can raise the head of the bed and the feet  and all that kind of stuff, and I find that valuable. I actually sleep with the head of my bed  raised just a little  [0:41:04]  Bit, especially if I'm not going to use my oral appliance that night. I'll raise that head of the  bed a couple degrees, and that makes a big difference. I'm kind of, you know, all of us in  this field, if you're not already a bit of a biohacker and figuring out what stuff works for you  and tracking your sleep and doing all that kind of stuff, I encourage it because you will  learn that there's night-to-night variability, and it has a heck of a lot more to do than or has  09/01/25   Page   of 12   14

SSC 2.0 -   111: ODI, Sleep Stages & Sleep Hygiene  a lot more to do with other things than just whether you wear an appliance or not. The  more you understand that, the more you can communicate that to your patient. So this is  also something helpful for you to know if you have a patient like, oh, man, I have a real  problem sleeping because, I'm too hot all the time or things like that.  Cooling Mattress Study   [0:41:49]  And speaking of hot, sometimes women go through, and as they're going through  menopause, will have hot flashes. So here's a study on that in the journal Menopause, and  here's what it says, the results. Vasomotor symptoms, VMS, frequency significantly de -  clined, so hot flashes, by 52% at eight weeks, and that's a significant number there,  P0001. That's a big deal. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, or PSQI, score significantly  declined 3.27 points from 11.14 points at baseline to 7.87 at follow-up, meaning their sleep  improved. The total hot flash related daily interference scale score significantly declined  from 4.16 at baseline to 1.92 at follow-up, which is interesting. So kind of daily interfer -  ence. Now, again, even that that would take into account sleeping, but it seemed that the  hot flashes even during the day were better by using this chili pad type of thing. Cool, huh?  So if that's you, then I would strongly encourage that. Or if you have a spouse that's going  through menopause, you might suggest that that can make a big difference. All right.  Sleep Hygiene (Exercise)   [0:43:13]  The next E is exercise. Daily exercise will help you sleep more deeply and is good for you  on a bunch of other levels, too. When you time the exercise might matter for you. That's  something that you would probably experiment with. My Garmin watch kind of tells me  stuff like that. It'll be like, hey, your vigorous exercise late in the day helped your sleep or  your vigorous exercise late in the day seems to have impacted your sleep.  [0:43:38]  You know, maybe consider timing your exercise differently tomorrow. Or if I don't exercise,  particularly if it's for a few days, my Garmin watch will tend to be like, hey, your lack of ex -  ercise seems to have impacted your sleep. It's just kind of taking measurements. It's doing  this also with heart rate variability, things like that. But experiment for yourself. Bottom line  for you and your patients, daily exercise, be that simply walking, lifting weights, more rig -  orous like running and things like that, whatever you can do. The best exercise, by the  way, is the one you'll do. The best exercise for fat loss is the one you do. The best exer -  cise for specifically targeting visceral and abdominal fat is the one you'll do. That is the  best exercise and that's the best exercise for your patients, too. So encourage you to do  this yourself and get yourself into an exercise regimen and then also obviously track it.  [0:44:37]  09/01/25   Page   of 13   14

SSC 2.0 -   111: ODI, Sleep Stages & Sleep Hygiene  Figure out, yeah, I got to work out in the morning. That helps me with my sleep the best.  Or you might be so for me personally, it doesn't seem to matter when I work out. It doesn't  seem to hurt my sleep.   Awesome. That's good for me because I travel a lot. And so there's  a lot of times when I'm out doing a run or on the treadmill doing a run at like 10:30 at night  and then I can still get a good night's sleep. My wife, on the other hand, exercising late at  night seems to kind of mess up her sleep.  Sleep Hygiene (Priority)   [0:45:01]  Last is P for priority. Make sleep a priority. I've mentioned multiple times already if you're  into athletics, if you're into stuff like that, but all of us are into the athletics of life. All of us  want to feel good. All of us want to look good. All of us want to have energy and vitality.  Sleep is critical for that. All of us want to be mentally alert. All of us want to avoid mental  decline. Sleep is critical for that. Sleep must be a priority for you. And particularly if you're  treating people for it, don't be the medical doctor that's 100 pounds overweight telling peo -  ple they should take care of themselves, be the doctor that is practicing what they preach.  And that doesn't mean you're perfect. It just means you're trying to do these same things  as your patients.  [0:45:53]  And that will make you much more believable. It'll make you more relatable as you tell your  patients, yeah, you know, hey, I struggle to get to bed on the same time every night or I  struggle to give myself enough time for sleep or I struggle on the weekends. I tend to stay  on a bit of a night owl and I tend to stay up longer and then I have sleep debt and, you  know, share those things with your patients and work with them to put these things into  their life. And this sleep hygiene acronym with sleep, please teach this to your family first  and foremost, and then your team members so they can teach it to their families. Go to the  community ED thing, go to the university, go to your church, teach them this stuff. It's im -  portant for everybody and probably they've never been taught this stuff. So even though  for most of you watching this video right now, you're like, okay, you didn't necessarily teach  me that much that I didn't know right there. Maybe the chili pad, you hadn't heard of that or  who knows, maybe a little thing, but your friends, family, and neighbors, they've probably  never heard of any of these things and they are certainly not as expert as you are. So  please help them out with the sleep hygiene.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 14   14

