SSC 2.0 - 103: Examination Part 1  SSC 2.0   Level 1  103: Examination Part 1  [intro music]  Proper Diagnosis   [0:00:12]  Alright, so after our anatomy review, we are ready to get into our craniofacial pain exami -  nation, your TMD examination, the examination you're going to do to see if the patient has  a jaw problem or not. A couple far sides here first. For crying out loud, I was hibernating,  don't you guys ever take a pulse? So that's bad diagnostic technique. If you're burying the  patient and you didn't take a pulse, alright, maybe you need a little upgrade on your diag -  nosis, I think. And then I like to show this one as well. Proper diagnosis is the key to proper  treatment. And here we have another far side. You got this huge posse, they're out looking  for a criminal, I assume. You know they're all loaded for bear there. You got police, you got  locals, you got all sorts of people. And we got a hound dog leading the way who says in  his mind, I can't smell a damn thing. And the reason I kind of love this far side is I think  sometimes there's a lot of dentists following. Like, I'd kind of like the hound dog in this  metaphor is a key opinion leader.  [0:01:25]  I hate that term, by the way, a KOL. I hate being called a KOL. Because most of the KOLs  that I've met are more shills for companies. They're out there pitching whatever company  suits them at the moment or is paying them the most at the moment. And boy, I got to tell  you, in my little niche of dental sleep medicine and TMD, there's a lot of people that teach  that are out there with companies, with consulting. They've never done it. Maybe they've  done it a little bit in their practice and stuff, but their own practices weren't successful. I  mean, I know people who have made millions of dollars selling franchises, even though  their practice wasn't successful. I mean, I know the details of these practices because of  various things that have happened. So you're in luck. Have actually done this. I built up the  practice from my mentor that I bought in 1998. And that practice I bought for $350,000.  This last year, and as I'm recording this in 2025, in 2024, that practice that is now run by  Dr. Cameron Kuehne, who's my nephew. We collected $3.7 million in  [0:02:53]  That practice in Boise, Idaho. We have a practice in Salt Lake now. Maybe you've been to  that practice. If not, I encourage you to take one of the hands-on courses that we do. And  that's where we hold them because it's an awesome location for that. And we've got a  whole facility for teaching that'll hold up to 50 people. And then we have our clinic itself.  That clinic we bought from a guy a few years ago, 2018. And Dr. Kevin Mangelson runs  that clinic. And we've more than doubled the collections from what we bought it from and  09 /01/25   Page   of 1   15

SSC 2.0 - 103: Examination Part 1  added sleep apnea to that practice. It was a pure TMD practice. So, you know we do this. I  work with people like you. I've worked with hundreds of dentists very closely to help them  in their practices. So the things that I teach, and as I remake these videos for Spencer  Study Club, I'm sprinkling in the things that I've learned over the past seven years of  Spencer Study Club existence. Again, as I record this in 2025, I'm putting that in because I  learned during that time more things and a lot from dentists like  [0:04:11]  You and how to teach a principle perhaps better. One of the problems, as I'm sure you're  aware of, is if you are an expert at something, sometimes it's difficult to teach the basics.  Yeah? I mean, like for an example, if you're teaching your child how to ride a bike and  there's a lot of things that are just intuitively natural to you now, and to try to break that into  smaller pieces that they can wrap their head around is sometimes difficult. I'm learning  how to swim better, to do some triathlon type stuff. And the person, it's a unique person.  There's lots of people out there who can swim amazing, but they can't teach you how to do  that stroke just right. There's only so many people that can do something well and teach it  well. That's a relatively rare combination. So just be careful is my point. When you are  seeking out stuff, I know a lot of specialty club members, and I totally appreciate this, this  totally makes sense, but they'll be looking for kind of more like, hey, should I take that resi -  dency? Should I do this?  [0:05:23]  Should I go to this school, do this or facial pain thing? Should I do that? Usually my advice  on that stuff is memorize this material. When you feel that you're an expert in anatomy,  when you feel that you have taken all of the content that's in level three, that's all about the  TMD stuff. When you've got that to where it's just in you, where you could be on the street  and someone could come up and say, my jaw hurts, and you could go through all of that  stuff without any notes just because you've put in so many reps, and then you want more,  then that's when we go out. However, one of, I hope, the things that I bring in Spencer  Study Club is this constant and never-ending improvement of what we're doing. If you go  back to the original files of Spencer Study Club, you will not find one word about platelet-  rich fibrin, which is now massively utilized in our practices every day. There's not a day that  goes by that we're not doing PRF. And I didn't even mention it before because we didn't  really know about it. We didn't know that that was a thing.  [0:06:31]  And again, my knowledge is only a couple millimeters wide, but it's 100 miles deep. But  that had not really entered our field yet, even though it had been around for quite some  time. So you're getting now kind of the most up-to-date stuff. We continue to bring this to  you, we hope, before anybody else does. Or I don't mean it that way. I'm grateful for things  coming in from different people. The PRF stuff, which I'll talk about more later, that came  from Frank Henry. She's a member of Spencer Study Club, and he's a general dentist, and  he was using PRF in implant surgeries and extractions and third molar extractions and  stuff like that, and other, perio surgeries and whatnot. And then he brought it, he's like, hey,  you know, I've heard this could be used for TMD, what do you think? And at first, I kind of  09 /01/25   Page   of 2   15

SSC 2.0 - 103: Examination Part 1  was like, eh, that sounds a lot like prolotherapy, that sounds a lot like other stuff we've  done. I don't know that's gonna be that helpful or not. And then I dove into it more, and  then we started doing it, and now, boom, we're gonna teach you everything that we've  learned from this group.  [0:07:32]  Really, Spencer Study Club is, and I don't say this to try to be braggadocious or anything,  but we are the cutting edge of what is being done and what is possible in temporo -  mandibular disorders and dental sleep medicine, for that matter, because we don't have  boards of directors that we have to go through and all sorts of legal stuff and things like  that. I can kind of say whatever I want, I can teach these things, and then I'm all about re -  sults. If you're doing something and it's getting results, I wanna know about it, and then  that doesn't necessarily mean that I can always teach it to other people. There's certain  things that are a little bit out there, so to speak, and one of my principles, too, is that I will  never teach you something that would get you in trouble with your board of dentistry,  okay? It's not about legal, it's not about right, even. It's about what would eight other peers  of yours in your state think is appropriate. So let me give you an example of that before we  move on. I know this is a bit of a tangent here, but I think it's important to talk about.  [0:08:37]  There's a gentleman who invented an appliance that he used for temporomandibular dis -  orders, great guy, and it only hit on one side. And so you would kind of do your evaluation,  and you would determine which side they were kind of deficient on, and then it had a pad  on that side. And he had different theories of why this worked, but after talking to him a lit -  tle bit about it, I'm like, no dentist really should be using that appliance because you're  making claims, one, that are pretty broad, pretty extensive, but more importantly, every  dentist is gonna look at something that only hits on one side, and then they'll kind of al -  most make up in their head that there's been occlusal changes because of that, that the  other side, the teeth have super erupted, or that those teeth have been intruded or what -  ever. Because again, in dental school, guaranteed, you were never taught, yeah, just have  them hit on one side, right? Now, later, I actually, one night, I had an epiphany, and I called  up this doctor, and I said, hey, I think I might have an idea of how we could kind of sell your  device, because you tell me it's working dramatically with your patients.  [0:09:49]  Well, maybe it's like physical therapy, right? So if I went in and I had, so I'm a runner, so  let's say I go in, and the physical therapist figures out that I've got an imbalance, that my  muscles on one side are not contributing as much as the other side, or I have a leg length  discrepancy or whatever. I could have various things going on that they figure out, and  they would give me more than likely exercises to strengthen the deficient side to try to be  more balanced. I was like, you know what? Maybe that's what this is, is you're giving them  something, a little pad there, and the act of them biting on that pad is going to more en -  gage those elevator muscles on that side, and maybe that is part of the reason that you're  getting your effects. That is something that we could explain if we were talking to peers of  ours of, hey, no, this isn't like forever. Our goal isn't to just build up their teeth on one side,  09 /01/25   Page   of 3   15

SSC 2.0 - 103: Examination Part 1  and they only hit on one side for the rest of their life. This is more of a physical therapy  thing. So that's just an example, again, of understanding, who are you following, what are  they going  [0:10:59]  For, but don't be upset at me if there is some kind of fad, and there's claims out there be -  ing made on whatever, and you're like, yeah, Jamison doesn't seem to be on board with  this whole, all nitric oxide in the body comes from the nose. I'll talk about that later too. I  wonder why that is. Well, I'll probably have a reason for that, and you can go to the Face -  book group and post on that, but there's a lot of leaders out there in dentistry and all fields,  but I just know the dental sleep medicine and TMD field that are just like this hound dog.  Bring it all back there now. All right, cool. So let's move on.  Initial Evaluation and Screening   [0:11:36]  Initial evaluation and screening. Some of the things that you're going to look for on an ini -  tial eval. Panoramic radiograph, really, really got to have that, right? So could you evaluate  somebody without a pano? Absolutely. And with the diagnostic criteria I'll take you through  and stuff like that, the pano is really more to tell you, hey, there's something there, like a  blown out tooth, for example, that that could be the whole problem.   Just recently, Dr. Man -  gelson had a patient that had massive blockage of the carotid arteries and that came up  on our combing, but also would have come up on a pano had you been looking for it cor -  rectly. Okay, if you see occluded carotid arteries, you know splint therapy may not be the  thing that you want to recommend that that patient has right there. So a pano isn't great for  diagnosis of a TMJ problem, that's for sure. It's better for diagnosis of everything else. You  could see a broken jaw on a pano, you could see a bombed out tooth, you could see a tu -  mor, perhaps, you could see the carotid artery stenosis, you could see other things on the  pano that are just going to be like, wait a second, this person's presenting with jaw pain.  Hmm, I wonder if it could be one of these things I'm seeing here. So for the most part on a  pano for a patient with a TMJ problem, you're basically just going to see it normal. You're  going to see that everything's fine. Okay, so that's what the pano is for. The pano isn't to  see something  [0:13:17]  Objective that's like, oh, well, there you go. Clearly, that means they have a TMJ problem.  It's to rule out other stuff that could be an imposter of this jaw pain that you are thinking  might be a TMJ related problem. Okay, health history, history of their jaw problem in itself,  maximum opening, palpation for joint noises, sprain, stretch procedure, initial diagnosis  and treatment plan. This has been the same initial evaluation screening for years. You can  adapt this to what works best for you. But this is really, really simple. And with these simple  things, you can get to the correct diagnosis the vast majority of the time. And our initial  goal here is to kind of get to the bottom, get to the root cause, right? And you have these  09 /01/25   Page   of 4   15

SSC 2.0 - 103: Examination Part 1  patients that come in and they're like, oh, yeah, Dr. Spencer, well, you know I'm here be -  cause I have jaw pain. That's what my dentist sent me for. But, you know I'd also like to  talk to you about my neck pain and about my headaches and my dizziness. And I've got  also this ringing in my ears and ear pain sometimes. And, oh, I got this crazy pain behind  my eye.  Etiology and Root Cause   [0:14:29]  Does any of this sound familiar? So this is where, the TMJ patients are nuts. Stuff kind of  comes from where nuts does not mean not understanding their symptoms, where nuts is  nuts. And dentists get so confused and frustrated, if you will, by this thousand different  problems. And, it's kind of hard to blame them. So our goal is to kind of knock this down,  get rid of a few of the nuts here, and ultimately get down to our etiology, our root cause.  That's our goal, etiology and root cause. Whenever possible, can we get to the etiology or  the root cause? We can't, heads up, we can't all the time, but we're going to try to get to  that etiology or root cause whenever we can. So we have forms. You can get these in the  documents center. And this kind of gets their history and who referred them. And over  here, I'll get my pointer on the screen here. There we go. So over here is the asking the  patient, to number from one to 10. One being the most important, two, three, four and on.  What is the reason that they're there?  Craniofacial Pain Questionnaire   [0:15:39]  So they choose from these different symptoms and then there's also the frequency from  one being seldom to four being every day. And then the intensity, zero would be no pain  and then 10 is the most severe pain and actually I see that. I see that there's a little bit of  mistake here, but I guess, it says one to 10 on there and really, I do want zero to ten. But  usually the way the patients fill that out is they don't mark it if it's a zero. Yeah, so that is a  way to have the patient give you, what do you think is going on? What do they think is go -  ing on? And then to give you an idea of what to focus on first. So one of the things this is  mentioned more in level three, but one of the things we'll use at this point sometimes is to  ask the patient, if I had a magic wand and I could make any of your problems, any of your  symptoms go away from here up one at a time, what would you have me get rid of first?  And that'll help them to kind of say, well, you know really the thing that's bothering the  most is the whatever.  Initial Examination - Health History - SSRI Induced Bruxism   [0:16:47]  09 /01/25   Page   of 5   15

SSC 2.0 - 103: Examination Part 1  And then that's going to be their chief complaint. Okay. What's bothering them? What is  bothering them the most? All right, now let's look for some other things here on the health  history. All right, so here's another list. Current use of SSRI antidepressants. Now, this is  something you're probably familiar with, but you may not be. I find that most dentists have  at least heard of this, but a lot still haven't. So this information has been around a long,  long time, that there are problems with SSRIs. Now, this is a more recent article. I think I  might have the older one here in a second here. This is a more recent article, and this is  not just about SSRIs. This is, excuse me, this article is about SSRIs. It's a more recent  publication, and talking about how that is causing people to clench and grind their teeth  nighttime and sometimes daytime.  Medication and Addictive Substance Article   [0:17:40]  Now, this article kind of blew my mind, and this might be one that you want to dig into a  little bit. So 2020 article, and this is, as it says, medications and addictive substances po -  tentially inducing or attenuating sleep bruxism and or awake bruxism. So making it worse  or making it better, but as you're about to see, most of the medications just make it worse.  So here's table one, list of classes of medications potentially inducing or aggravating sleep  bruxism or awake bruxism. So the first class is anticonvulsants, and then we have our  subclasses there, and that's a boatload of medications, and that's not even the bottom of  it. That's to take it down to the bottom of it. That's a lot, yes? Then kind of continued, we  have the phenethylamines. We have the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and the  individual medications there. Those can all induce or aggravate bruxism. Then we have  some other medications that have been known to cause bruxism. Note the type of bruxism  here, so nonspecified, sleep and awake, sleep, just awake, things like that. And then lastly,  we have addictive substances that can cause or induce or aggravate bruxism, alcohol,  heroin, methamphetamine, things like that. And on the methamphetamine, remember that  that's a lot of people that are on ADHD medications. It's basically methamphetamine, so  that is another one to put into your bucket of maybe medications are causing these prob -  lems. So an older article talks about using buspirone as an antidote for SSRI-induced  bruxism.  [0:19:30]  That’s in your downloads too, in your document center. However, so we get a little bit of a  difference from the original Spencer Study Club videos to now. Because there are so many  medications that can start or aggravate bruxism, really look at that. Don't just blow that off.  I know that a lot of times as dentists, we don't get into the medications as much, and I  don't teach using medications much at all. So as a side effect of that, we sometimes don't  look at their medications. I would strongly encourage you to look. And if you think it could  be a medication, then what are you going to do? Okay, you're going to see if it makes  sense with their history. So you're going to say, all right, so you've been on this medication,  09 /01/25   Page   of 6   15

SSC 2.0 - 103: Examination Part 1  and again, you might print out these lists of all these bajillion medications here and have  that handy so that you can be like, all right, so what are the medications again that they  might be on? Or have a team member do that for you so that you don't have to do it. But  ask, how long have you been on this medication?  [0:20:41]  And then obviously the follow-up question would be like, when did your jaw problem start?  Or you're going to see if those things correlate. Oh, I've been on that since I was 16 years  old. Well, how long have you had a jaw problem? Last six months, and they're 42. Okay,  that's probably not it. But the person that says, well, let's see, I'm 42, and I started that  medication six months ago, and my jaw's been hurting for three or four months. Could that  have something to do with it? Well, look for other stuff. Has there been any trauma? It's  just the next thing on my list. Do they have inflammatory disorders in general? Is there  other stuff going on? You will find as you start looking for this, it will be relatively regular.  Now it's going to depend on your volume of how often you see this. In our practices, not  unusual for a patient every two, three months where their entire problem is their medica -  tion. And if we can talk to their doctor and say, hey, doctor, this person seems to be having  this reaction to their medication.  [0:21:44]  Have you ever heard of that before? Normally they'll say, no, I haven't heard of that before.  That's when you would then send them that 2020 article with that medication circled. Or if  it's an SSRI, you could even send them the article from 1999 that talks about using bus -  pirone as an antidote to that to also show them, it's like, hey, this isn't just some, latest  thought process. This is going on 30 years old, this data. We've known this for a long, long  time. And try, because why not? If you could help that person get rid of their jaw pain sim -  ply by their medications being changed, and in my experience, especially when it's the  SSRIs, the patient will almost always say, yeah, it doesn't seem to be helping that much  anyway. That's then going to lead us down the sleep apnea road, okay? Because some -  times, particularly women, are put on selective serotonin uptake inhibitors. They're diag -  nosed with depression. Although actually what's going on is they have sleep apnea and or  upper resistance syndrome, and that is the reason that they have a problem and it's being  treated as if their fatigue or whatever is  [0:22:54]  Depression and they haven't gotten down to the etiology. Their problem is probably not a  SSRI deficiency. Okay, so hopefully that's enough of that on the drugs, but really look into  it. Don't just blow that off. I think most dentists kind of blow that off. We're surgeons, right?  We think anatomy, we think what can I fix, we think occlusion, we think all this stuff that we  were trained on. We don't tend to think neurochemistry and biochemistry and stuff like that.  As a matter of fact, if you're like me, you didn't enjoy those classes that much. I mean,  maybe it did to a degree, but some of that biochemistry stuff is kind of hard and we didn't  see exactly how it applied to us because we're surgeons. We were going to ultimately be  trained to look at an x-ray, see a hole in the tooth, and then figure out how to fix that hole,  how to restore that dentition to form and function. Yes? So this is a little bit outside of our  09 /01/25   Page   of 7   15

SSC 2.0 - 103: Examination Part 1  typical wheelhouse. Don't, don't forget it. Okay? Don't just blow that off. Look at the med -  ications, ask the patient, is this up to date? Is this all the medications you're on?  [0:23:57]  I know that you're not used to telling your dentist necessarily every medication you're on. I  kind of need to know this. And then you could have that printed out right there for them,  laminated or whatever. Here's some of the medications that can cause bruxism and jaw  pain. And I just threw in the jaw pain part there, but that's what we're saying, right? Is we're  implying that that increased bruxism, and especially if it came out of nowhere, that could  cause their jaw pain. So you could have that list there and they'll be like impressed. It's  like, oh my gosh, that's like 50, 60, 70 medications on that list you got there. Yeah, I might  be on one of those and kind of go through and see if that could be their problem.  SSRI Induced Bruxism   [0:24:37]  So this is the SSRI-induced bruxism article that I have shared with physicians for many  years. I would still use this if I were you. The one that I showed before that's a little bit  more recent is fine. However, sometimes it's a good idea to kind of show that this isn't  some new fad or new thing that you just like thought up yourself and that this idea has  been around a long, long time.  [0:25:03]  This paper discusses using a different SSRI as an antidote to the bruxism brought on by  these, or actually I should say that differently, use of a different antidepressant in conjunc -  tion with the SSRI that is apparently causing the bruxism. So for example, if the patient's  on Zoloft, then you add Buspirone to the mix in order to stop the bruxism. How I've han -  dled this in the past, how I would suggest you do too, is I talk to the physician, so leave a  message with the patient's primary care physician, whoever put them on the SSRI in the  first place, have that physician call me back, say, hey, common patient, she's suffering with  a TMJ problem. We think that this may be related to an SSRI-induced bruxism. Have you  heard of that before? And I usually say it just like that. Have you heard of that before? Only  one time so far have I had a psychiatrist say, yeah, I was aware of that. That bodes ill, be -  cause that means, and like all that stuff I just showed a second ago with all of those differ -  ent medications, possibly making bruxism occur or be worse, that means most physicians  have no clue that that's a thing.  [0:26:24]  And I think that's one of our big problems, if I haven't mentioned this already, that with  TMD, we're kind of ships passing in the night, right? So, they get put on a medication, this  causes a jaw problem, jaw problem is a dentist thing, so they go to the dentist, but they  don't mention the medication because they don't think that there's any connection there.  And so they don't tell the dentist about the medication or the dentist doesn't know to even  think about the medication. And when they go back to their doctor and the doctor brings up  09 /01/25   Page   of 8   15

SSC 2.0 - 103: Examination Part 1  the medication, they're not going to say, by the way, my jaw hurts, okay? They're going to  say, yeah, I feel like I have more energy or that I'm more emotionally stable or whatever it  is. Okay? So anyway, so I talked to the doctor, they usually say, no, I've never heard of  that before. And then I say, hey, let me send you this article. It talks about using Buspirone  as an antidote to SSRI-induced bruxism. A couple options, I can put them on the Bus -  pirone if you'd like me to, and then they can set up an appointment to get in to see you in  the next coming weeks and you can see if that makes a difference. Or you can do that, or  [0:27:27]  You could potentially change their SSRI. And what I've seen often is the doctor and the pa -  tient saying, you know what, there hasn't been that much of an effect on the Zoloft anyway,  so maybe I just switch to a non-SSRI. Now going back to that other article, there's some  non-SSRIs that can cause bruxism too. So just kind of, again, the reason for all of this time  on this subject right here is this is getting missed. It's getting missed by, for sure, almost  any dentist and almost any medical doctor. And when you've got dozens upon dozens of  medications and substances that can cause bruxism, and then bruxism can cause TMJ  problems, this is why it's a problem that as dentists we tend to go to the occlusion etiology,  right? Even to the stress etiology. And the stress etiology may have started this, but it's  certainly the medication that exacerbated it. Okay, so that's enough on that, but don't ig -  nore this. Don't just blow this off and be like, oh yeah, you know what, that's interesting. I  doubt I'll ever see that. No, you'll see it all the time as long as you're looking for it.  Trauma   [0:28:45]  Okay, so back to kind of our list here. So trauma to the jaw can result in TMJ problems,  and that trauma could be a long time ago. So you ask the patient if you ever had trauma to  your head and neck area, to your facial area, and sometimes, particularly in women or un -  shaven men, you might even notice a scar on their chin. And it's kind of funny because  you'll be like, hey, I see a little, am I right? Is that a scar on your chin? Although go, oh  yeah, oh my gosh, you know what? That's from when I fell off my tricycle when I was three  years old. And you'll be like, huh, so do you think that maybe trauma to the developing jaw  could then down the road cause a problem? Well, sure it could. The trauma also, it could  be bruxism itself. It could be having their mouth open for three hours in your chair. It could  be use of a sleep appliance that is maybe restricting some of their motion or something  like that. So expand your idea of what trauma is to not just be in hitting the face or, playing  sports or something like that.  [0:29:51]  Trauma could be something broader than what you've thought of as trauma in the past.  Okay, rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory diseases. People with rheumatoid arthritis, actual -  ly, if you look at the diagnostic criteria for rheumatoid arthritis, it'll often have something on  there about the jaw joint and that a rheumatologist would palpate the jaw joint as one of  09 /01/25   Page   of 9   15

SSC 2.0 - 103: Examination Part 1  the joints that they would examine during their evaluation. However, like most of the time  here, so a person being treated for rheumatoid arthritis, as soon as they walk across our  threshold, now it's TMJ and it's not going to be covered by their insurance. So that's just  kind of the way it is, just kind of sucks, but that's the way it is. With that said, though, just  recognize rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disorder. It's going to react different.  We're going to treat it the same for the most part of other patients. I don't like putting peo -  ple on some of the more aggressive medications. If that's going to be done, it's going to be  done by a rheumatologist. But those medications are kind of scary. So we're just now,  again, as I'm recording this, we're starting to use PRF in even rheumatoid arthritis cases  and stuff.  Previous Treatment   [0:31:06]  And there's starting to be a body of evidence for that, that it could be positive versus some  of these medications that can be pretty tough on people. Okay, previous treatment. Why  look for previous treatment? Because that's going to give you a lot of information on what  others have thought this person was dealing with and what has helped and what hasn't  helped. Okay, so for example, here are the splints and night guards of a single patient that  I saw in my office. She brought in this collection of splints. You've heard of the bag of den -  tures patient. Maybe you've seen those patients in your career. Well, this is the bag of  splints patient. And I can go through, and I will go through here, and point out kind of each  of these different appliances and tell you the philosophy of each dentist that she saw, be -  cause these were all different dentists. Okay, she shopped around, went to different den -  tists to get different appliances. So this one here, this is a squishy upper night guard, a soft  upper night guard. Guess who gave that to her? Well, probably an oral surgeon. Why do I  say that? Oral surgeons tend to use soft night guards.  [0:32:22]  Why? Because I'll bet you, as if you're not an oral surgeon, you're probably thinking, yeah,  soft night guard, that's terrible. That'll make them chew it. Well, I don't know if that's true,  but oral surgeons tend to use soft night guards because it doesn't require a lot of follow-  up, right? You fit it and that's it. As long as it's smooth and stuff, you're good to go. Don't  have to see them back ever again. And oral surgeons don't tend to do a lot of follow-up like  that. So when oral surgeons get patients with TMJ problems, and by the way, it's the oral  surgeons in your town who tend to see the TMJ patients unless there's someone like me in  your town, or unless you become the someone like me in your town, then those oral sur -  geons will start referring to you. But that's the first one, okay? Then we've got next door  here, we have what's called a Co-ESTI programmer. So there's, you can't really see it on  the picture, but there's a little bump on the anterior that makes it so the lower anteriors will  go and hit that little bump, keeping the patient open a bit posteriorly.  [0:33:21]  09 /01/25   Page   of 10   15

SSC 2.0 - 103: Examination Part 1  So it's kind of like an NTI. It's just a different version of an NTI. It does not open the person  up close to as far as an NTI, of course, and so there's certain advantages of that. But this  person probably went to Co-ESTI, probably. You know they probably did some training and  they're like, oh, Co-ESTI programmer, right on, I'll use that. Up here, we have kind of a  gelb lower splint. Here we have a classic gelb with the metal bar, but here we have a gelb.  Here we basically have a gelb. So you've got a lower with acrylic built up on the back of it.  So that appliance, this appliance, and this appliance are basically the same appliance.  Again, not uncommon in the TMD world for dentists to be like, yeah, that splint sucks, mine  is really the magical splint, and never understood that, but they'll go ahead and give them  their new splint, I assume to charge them, I guess, but I'm sure that's not what they're  thinking in their head, I'll assume that they are not bad people, but they have been trained  and they think that whatever the old splint didn't have and theirs does have, or what the  old splint did have that theirs doesn't have, is what's really going to get them to the next  step.  [0:34:41]  This person also gave them an upper night guard, so that's an upper, this is a lower, this  one just a lower, just a lower, that's an upper splint, that's an upper splint. This one, I can't  see what's in the case there, but this is an upper and a lower, but they're thin, kind of more  like aligners, and that was what the patient wore, if I remember correctly, they wore both of  them at the same time. This one down here is called a “MAGO” maxillary anterior guid -  ance orthotic, so that means that person went through training with someone named Bob  Lee, or BioAesthetics, I'm not even sure that that group still exists, but they were popular  10, 20 years ago. This appliance is worn on the upper, has massive anterior guidance, so  it's got these big old ramp plastic in the front, so the person brings it on any direction and it  kind of, well if they close, it kind of pushes their jaw backwards a little bit, but it discludes  the posterior teeth is the idea of that. I always thought that was a stupid thought process,  no offense if you've come through that Bob Lee CR type of training, because the splint it -  self is  [0:36:00]  Smooth, but then the crowns that they would make when they would do full mouth recon -  struction on these people were super highly interdigitated, super sharp cusps. I'm like, why  would you go from a flat splint to then sharp cusps? That makes no sense to me. My phi -  losophy, which you'll learn more in level three, is if you think you're going to be changing  the person's occlusion, then you give them a splint with occlusion. You let them try out  what they're going to use. Why would you do flat plane and then at some point you need to  figure out, can this person function with what we're about to do? So that's why we use di -  rective lower splints and kind of directive upper splints with Farrar style night guards to  bring the jaw into the right spot. Okay, bottom line is as I saw this patient and I went  through and again I'm knowledgeable with all of these different appliances so I know what  the dentist was thinking and then finally I just basically asked the patient, which one of  these helped you the most? And she goes, well actually, this one right up here, before that  that back part broke off, that really helped a lot. And I fixed it.  09 /01/25   Page   of 11   15

SSC 2.0 - 103: Examination Part 1  [0:37:09]  That was it. Now later or even right now you might think, well, Jamison, why didn't you  make her another splint, right? Why didn't you make her the splint that you thought she  needed? And the thing is, is I'm not even sure this patient needed a splint. But she had  spent, so let's kind of add it up here, this was probably $500, this was probably $1,000,  this was probably $1,000, another $1,000, this is $1,000, this is probably a couple thou -  sand maybe, this is a couple thousand, but she didn't get all of her teeth crowned so she  got off lucky there. And then let's call this one up here maybe $500. So 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, let's  call it $8,000 that she has spent on splints over the years. And that's just the splints, so  who knows what all these doctors charged for their follow-up and all the other stuff and just  the initial evaluations and that. I would guess that probably that's at least another $8,000  or so, so she's probably in the $15,000 to $20,000 range of treating her TMJ problem at  this point.  [0:38:20]  And to basically say, I'm not even sure you need any of these pieces of plastic. I don't  know that that would have been good for her, frankly, so I didn't do it that way. I just fixed  that appliance that we knew was working and then I moved on from there. So bottom line,  if someone has had treatment already, they've had a night guard, they've had a day splint,  ask them about it. And don't, again, throw the dentist under the bus. I didn't go through this  with her, by the way, and go, yeah, squishy splint, crap, oh, that's a Co-ESTI Program,  that's garbage, that's a Gelb splint, that's terrible. I didn't do any of that. I just kind of asked  her, yeah, what was your experience with that? Did that make anything better? Did it make  anything worse? We don't ever want to throw our colleagues under the bus, in my opinion.  There are a couple occasions that we do. I'll talk about that later, mostly related to sleep  apnea. But for the most part, we just want to learn what happened with these different ap -  pliances. And I'll talk a little bit more about this later, but using these pieces of plastic as -  sumes something. What's  [0:39:21]  It assume? Well, let me not, make you wait for me to cover that. It assumes the teeth are  in contact. Okay, so none of these appliances here do anything at all if the person doesn't  have their teeth together, do they? So we'll talk more about 1% occlusion later, but just  think about that. You look at these splints and you think, oh, how does that work and what  does this do? Well, it doesn't do anything at all unless the person's biting on it, okay? So if  you have a person with more 1% occlusion, then they're not actually doing anything other  than just being a retainer on whatever arch they're on. Okay, so that's previous treatment.  Migraine Headaches - Temporalis Headache   [0:40:00]  09 /01/25   Page   of 12   15

SSC 2.0 - 103: Examination Part 1  Next, migraine headaches, temporalis headaches. So this is kind of an interesting area.  You'll have patients that will report that they have migraines and you want to ask them  questions about that. So a true migraine, there's a lot of different headaches and I don't go  a lot into detail on the bajillion different headaches. That frankly gets a little bit into the oro -  facial pain realm that I don't go down. That tends to go into the management realm that I'm  not as excited about.  [0:40:32]  So the headaches that we see on a daily basis when you're treating TMJ problems are  muscle tension type headaches. And pain from the temporal tendon and things like that,  pain from the joint itself can result in a headache. But those are all things that are going to  get better with your treatment. Whereas there are some headaches that they require man -  agement and I don't like managing things particularly with medications. So migraines, you  need to get kind of clear and don't just move on when the person's like, oh, I have mi -  graines. You're like, oh, okay. So ask some questions. So what questions do you ask? So  tell me about your migraines. How often do you have them? Do you have normal  headaches or just migraines? When you get a migraine, is there any prodrome or aura or  indication that you're going to get a migraine? So you're kind of fine and then something  happens like you start seeing lights or you hear something or you feel a certain way. You  don't have a headache yet, but you know that that headache's coming on. Any of that?  Have you tried any medications for your migraines like Maxalt or Zomeg or anything like  that?  [0:41:42]  Okay, so those are all the questions you ask. Now let me give you some of the dialogue  that a patient might give you there. So a true migraine, or I will use that phrase, doesn't  tend to have normal headaches. They don't tend to have tension type headaches. They  tend to just have migraines. Sometimes they will have some tension type headaches. In  my experience, when they have tension type headaches or muscle contraction type  headaches and you help the muscle contraction type headaches, their migraines go down  too. But there's some people that they don't have normal headaches. They just have mi -  graines. Those people typically will have a heads up that it's coming. They'll have some  sort of prodrome or aura. Those people, if they take a drug like Maxalt or Zomeg, it will  tend to abort the headache. So that is kind of your classic migraineur. A non-classic or a  maybe better said a probably don't have a migraine in the first place are people that they  have regular headaches and sometimes they get really bad. And sometimes it gets so bad  that it makes them sick. That seems in my experience to be kind of the hallmark of people  declaring, if you will, that they have migraines, is they had pain bad enough that it made  them sick to their stomach.  [0:43:02]  And so then they'll be like, oh, Google it. Oh yeah, you know that must mean it's a mi -  graine. Usually they will not have been diagnosed by a medical doctor. They'll just have  come up with this on them by themselves or through Dr. Google. Usually if they are diag -  nosed or temporarily diagnosed or tentatively diagnosed and they're given a drug like  09 /01/25   Page   of 13   15

SSC 2.0 - 103: Examination Part 1  Maxalt or Zomeg, they will say, quote, yeah, it just kind of takes the edge off. Okay, that's  always what they say. And again, not how the drug works, not what it's for. So probably  that's not their problem. Yeah, I think I covered all the stuff there. So that's kind of how you  differentiate by asking those questions, getting their comments back. The person who is a  migraineur and does take the Zomeg and it aborts the headache and stuff like that. If they  have a TMJ problem, you can almost guarantee that they're going to have way fewer mi -  graines because the jaw pain, the facial pain, the head pain does tend to be a trigger of  their migraines. Not always, but it usually is. So it's rare that I've seen a patient that their  frequency and severity of their migraines doesn't get better with TMD-focused treatment.  Exedrin   [0:44:15]  Okay, now there's another thing out there that you should be aware of that increases some  of this self-diagnosis of migraines. And that is Excedrin, but not extra strength Excedrin,  but extra strength Excedrin's brother, if you will. But what's in extra strength Excedrin? So  you probably know this already. It's acetaminophen, aspirin, and caffeine, right? Well,  there's another drug on the market and related to extra strength Excedrin, and that is Ex -  cedrin migraine. What is an Excedrin migraine? Well, you guessed it, acetaminophen, as -  pirin, and caffeine. What you may not have known is that it's the exact same formulation.  It's not a different drug. It is the same drug in a different bottle. And because of this, there's  people, and I could totally appreciate this. You go to the store, you got a headache, you're  like, oh my gosh, I got this terrible headache. What should I take? And you look at all the  stuff on the shelf and you're like, all right, anything that doesn't say extra strength, let's just  rule that out immediately because I got a bad headache. I need something extra strength.  And then you see, Excedrin migraine. And you're like, Eureka, that is what I got.  [0:45:29]  I got a migraine. So you take Excedrin migraine and then it helps. And the fact that it helps  reinforces that, hey, you must have migraines because it says right on the box, Excedrin  migraine, and I took that stuff and my migraine got better, therefore I have migraines.  Okay. So watch for that because there's a lot of people out there that I've seen in my ca -  reer that that is their migraine. Their migraine is a headache that gets better when they  take Excedrin Migraine. Okay. And that's a big deal for you to recognize because that is  very different than a migraine that has a prodrome, has an aura, responds to Zomeg, stuff  like that. Now, not to be outdone, there's a bunch of different Excedrins on the market. It's  fun because Excedrin Migraine and Extra Strength Excedrin are the exact same drug.  They're just in different boxes and on this marketing piece, they're as far away as possible  from each other, which I think is just kind of funny. All the rest of these actually have differ -  ent stuff in them. So they have, they're Excedrin plus whatever to make it specific for that.  09 /01/25   Page   of 14   15

SSC 2.0 - 103: Examination Part 1  Advil Migraine   [0:46:34]  But once again, Excedrin Migraine and Extra Strength Excedrin are exactly the same  thing. Not to be outdone, Advil Migraine, right? And these have been around for a long  time, by the way. So Advil Migraine, what is an Advil Migraine? Well, 200 milligrams  ibuprofen. That's it. Okay, you might be surprised at that. You're like, oh, yeah, probably  Tylenol and caffeine. No, just ibuprofen. That's it. Advil Migraine is Advil. And that's all. So  it's just kind of a marketing thing. So as you are talking to patients, the reason I kind of go  through all this stuff is this can be kind of confusing for you. If the patient just said, oh,  yeah, I've got migraines. And you're like, okay, and you just moved on. You could have  missed some stuff there that could have been very helpful for you in your diagnosis. Be -  cause if you just ask the follow up question, hey, well, yeah, okay, so tell me about your  migraines. And what do you take? Oh, I take Advil Migraine. It seems to work really well.  And you're like, all right, sweet. So this person's headaches respond to ibuprofen. That's  probably not a migraine. Okay. And, again, we don't want to make fun of them.  [0:47:40]  And as a little aside here real quick, why would someone want to self-diagnose migraine?  Why would someone want to tell people I have migraines versus just I get headaches? So  let me use this as an analogy. Let's say you go to work, and you have an assistant that  comes to you. And she says, Hey, doc, I'm sorry, I have a headache today. You're probably  going to be like, all right, well, go take some Advil. You know, maybe from now on, you're  going to have Advil Migraine in the cupboard, in the cupboard there. But you're probably  gonna say, Hey, go take a couple pills, go close your eyes in my office for 15 minutes.  Let's get you back to work. I'm sure you'll be fine. Right? You're not gonna have a ton of  sympathy per se. You I mean, you're you're a nice person. So you'll have some but you're  going to be a little bit kind of like, okay, yeah, just suck it up. Let's do this. On the other  hand, if an assistant came to you and said, Doc, I'm coming down with a migraine, what  would you do? Well, you'd probably say, Hey, you know what? Go ahead and go home.  [0:48:54]  You'd probably let them leave for the day. Because if you have migraines, you might even  be more prone to do that because you know how bad it sucks. If you don't have migraines,  which I don't, for example, you would also send them home because those of us who don't  have migraines probably get headaches every once in a while. And I get a headache every  once in a while, not not frequently, but enough to remember that it sucks. Okay. And to  think to myself, oh, my gosh, you know, whatever I call a headache, a migraine must be 10  times worse than that. So let me send them home. Here's the point. How people are treat -  ed is impacted by, sometimes the diseases they have or that they present to others as  having or things like that. So sometimes you need to take that into account as well. So  sometimes you need to take that into account as well.  [outro music]  09 /01/25   Page   of 15   15

