SSC 2.0 - 101: Anatomy Review Part 1  SSC 2.0   Level 1  101: Anatomy Review Part 1  [intro music]  Overview   [0:00:12]  Hello, and welcome to Spencer Study Club 2.0. Now, you may have been a member of  Spencer Study Club for years now. You may be brand new, you may have just joined. I am  very happy that you are starting here with the 101 videos, with the starter videos, starting  with anatomy. Now, maybe you didn't start here, but I'm happy that you've ended up here.  And let me tell you why I say that. So the foundation of everything you're going to learn in  Spencer Study Club is really anatomy-based. I'm not a drug guy, I'm not a neurochemistry  guy. We talk a little bit about those things, but really I'm always going to go back to anato -  my because I think it is so important. And your understanding and knowledge of anatomy  is going to serve you well. It's going to allow you to talk to oral surgeons and to orthodon -  tists and to other of your colleagues in a way that they will understand. Again, we are all  surgeons, and we studied anatomy in dental school. Granted, gross anatomy was very  early on in our dental school training, but then we spent a ton of time studying dental  anatomy, tooth anatomy.  [0:01:29]  And we spent a little bit of time on the jaw joints and the muscles, but really it does come  down to anatomy and understanding TMJ problems without a proper understanding of  anatomy is basically impossible. So again, thank you for starting here. Thank you for start -  ing on the foundation. Or if you went ahead and looked at what appliance should I use or  how should I market my services or stuff like that, and eventually made it back here, good  for you too. And this may be something that you watch a few times. Again, it's been a long  time since you've studied anatomy, unless you've been a member of Spencer Study Club  for a long time, and now you are going through the new videos a second time. You're go -  ing through this content. Heads up, anatomy hasn't changed since I first recorded these  videos back in 2017. We launched Spencer Study Club in 2018. Not a lot of new muscles  or joints or otherwise discovered in those years, but there's gonna be new content. And the  main reason, so you may even ask, well, why, Jamison, are you even re-recording things  like anatomy since it hasn't really changed? Well, because frankly, I've changed and how I  teach it has changed. And that comes from mentoring and coaching and working with and  having colleagues of thousands of dentists over that period of time since that original  recording of this content. I've had the privilege of speaking to literally thousands and thou -  sands of dentists and having well over a thousand, maybe 2000 members of Spencer  09/01/25   Page   of 1   19

SSC 2.0 - 101: Anatomy Review Part 1  Study Club at this point. And having them give me feedback on what they liked, what they  learned, how they learned, the things that they took away from this.  [0:03:21]  And then also I've seen people asking questions on our Facebook group. I've seen people  struggle when learning injections or things like that. So even if you are going through this,  maybe you've gone through this multiple times with the original content, I think you'll get a  lot out of this new recording as the way it's gonna be taught is gonna be a little bit different  than it has in the past. So let's go ahead and get started. Now, some things will be very  similar to the original because I think that playing the classics is appropriate. And a lot of  these things are really how I feel and how I believe these things should be taught.  All TMJ patients are…   [0:04:05]  And that starts off with this slide, all TMJ patients are. And if you have attended my pre -  sentation in person at the Hinman or at Greater New York or CDA or Star of the North, Star  of the South, Pacific Northwest, whatever, you maybe have seen this before and you know  the answer I'm looking for. And I give you a hint in the crowd and we got the acorns here  and the answer I'm looking for is NUTS. And the NUTS is, as you know also, is an acro -  nym that stands for not understanding their symptoms. Now, when I originally kind of put  this content together and as I give this presentation around the world, the NUTS also is  what, at least dentists my age are going to say about TMJ patients. Yeah, they're NUTS,  right? They have problems that the dentist doesn't understand, that our training in dental  school didn't prepare us for. And I like to point out, and if you've had some experience with  this yet, you understand this, and if you haven't helped a lot of people with TMJ problems,  then this is about to happen to you or your patients. It is very common for people with a  TMJ problem to present first not at a dental office. They may hurt in their jaw and maybe  even they know that it's TMJ or they think that it's TMJ. Nowadays they would Google it  and they're like, oh, shoot, it sounds like I have a TMJ problem. Maybe they even reach  out to a dentist. Maybe they even reach out to someone like me, like one of my practices  in Boise or Salt Lake, and they are told, well, it's gonna be X hundreds of dollars for that  initial examination.  [0:05:45]  So they're like, well, okay, forget that. Let me go somewhere that's covered by my insur -  ance. So they start off maybe at a, you know, what I call a dock in the box, a quick med  place. And they go to the quick med place and they say, you know, my ear hurts. Or  maybe they even say their jaw hurts. You know, they're going to point right to their jaw joint  and maybe they perceive that it's joint, but they oftentimes think it's ear pain. And those  things are so close to each other and they've had ear pain before, so they start off there.  And the doctor they see, or nowadays, frankly, a nurse practitioner or some sort of care  extender person is going to see them, do an evaluation and go, you know, I don't really  09/01/25   Page   of 2   19

SSC 2.0 - 101: Anatomy Review Part 1  see an infection or anything. I don't see a problem here. Let's try an antibiotic and see  what happens. They put the patient on antibiotic and probably nothing happens. And so  then they follow up, the patient follows up with the doctor or whoever prescribed the an -  tibiotic and says, I didn't really seem to help.  [0:06:48]  And they're like, well, let's maybe try another antibiotic. And at some point, the person's  going to be like, you know, I don't think this is your problem. I'm not sure what's going on  with you. Let's refer you to an ear, nose and throat doctor. So they go to the ear, nose and  throat doctor. The ear, nose and throat doctor is going to do an evaluation and they're im -  mediately going to see that they don't have an ear problem. So they will then say, "you  have TMJ, see your dentist." This is part of the problem is our ear, nose and throat col -  leagues think that all of us dentists have a lot of training in TMJ problems, have a lot of ex -  pertise, a lot of experience. Whereas, of course, we really don't. And we'll talk about that  more in these initial levels here and things that I've learned, again, in teaching dentists all  over the world in this area. Most dental professionals have no idea what's going on in the  jaw joint. And it's really kind of sad and frightening. And the patient then is like frustrated,  right? That the doctor really couldn't help them. Maybe at that point they get to a dentist,  but maybe not.  [0:08:02]  Maybe they go to a physical therapist. Physical therapist treats them with typical physical  therapy modalities, treating the muscle pain, things like that. And it feels better. They leave  the physical therapist feeling better every time. But then the problem comes back really  quick. Maybe they try a chiropractor. Maybe they eventually do go to their dentist, to their  dentist, and not to a specialist or whatever. And the dentist then does what? What's every  dentist going to do for a TMJ problem? What have you done in the past? Night guard,  right? Night guard, universal treatment for all TMJ problems. So they get a night guard and  maybe it helps. If it helps, their dentist has no idea why it helped. And if it doesn't help,  their dentist has no idea why it didn't help. At some point they may be referred to someone  who limits their practice in this. And then it is luck of the draw what they get. So since, you  know, again, since the original recordings of Spencer Study Club, there's a new specialty.  And it's called orofacial pain. Myself and Dr. Kuehne have master's degrees in craniofacial  pain through Tufts University, and we chose not to sit for the examination to become  boarded in orofacial pain because, frankly, we have no interest in orofacial pain as that  specialty is practiced, which is typically more drug-related, more psychological approach,  and not a anatomical, physical approach to it.  [0:09:32]  We don't want people that are seeking pain care. There are, in our opinion, in my opinion,  pain management doctors for stuff like that. So when I have patients that are looking to  manage their pain, I refer them to doctors who manage pain. In our practice, we try to get  people out of pain. We try to get their function restored to normal. As you're going to learn  through this, and again, this is new content from the original, we now have regenerative  medicine methods that we're using in TMD that have changed everything of how we ap -  09/01/25   Page   of 3   19

SSC 2.0 - 101: Anatomy Review Part 1  proach this. That's my approach. This is an anatomical approach, and as of the recording  of this, currently the orofacial pain field isn't really doing a lot of platelet-rich fibrin injections  or things like that. They are kind of doing the same things they've done for a long time. So  this can be frustrating for the patients because it completely depends on who they see of  what's going to be done. Are they going to get splint therapy? Are they going to get regen -  erative TMD approach? Are they going to be referred for surgery? And speaking of that re -  ally quickly, our oral surgeon colleagues, in general, don't want to deal with temporo -  mandibular disorder patients.  [0:11:03]  They do because it is part of their surgical training, and they do surgical procedures, the  most benign of which being arthrocentesis with two needles. But also, people will get open  joint surgery. They will get joint replacement surgery. And in my experience, oral surgeons  who do these types of surgeries are good people. They're good surgeons. They're just try -  ing to help out because they were referred a patient, which means whoever referred them  already tried to do conservative things to whatever level they knew how. And so now the  surgeon is trying less conservative things to help that patient because the patient needs  help. I believe that you, watching this video, can make a huge difference in people's lives.  You can be the one that helps these patients and help them to avoid unnecessary surg -  eries. Again, not being critical of our surgical colleagues. They are just trying to help. But in  my experience, when I've gone to surgeons and shown them what we're doing, they stop  doing surgery because they know that that's how they would want to be treated. That's  how they would want their spouse to be treated. That's how they would want their mother  or daughter to be treated.  [0:12:26]  So they then work with us. That'll be the same for you. If you can really get a grip on this  foundational content, and then if you can really get a grip and memorize, if you will, the  principles of treatment for temperamental disorders that are in this content, to be rather  bold, you don't need anything else. You can go get other information. You can go learn  about kind of weird headache problems and burning tongue syndrome and things like that.  Cool. And if you enjoy doing that kind of more pharmaceutical methods of treating certain  things that are less or not anatomic, great, more power to you. But there are a lot of peo -  ple out there with anatomic type problems that you can deal with, that you can treat, and  you could change their life. You could be the one that helps them and also helps them very  affordably because the treatments that we provide may cost thousands of dollars, but they  don't cost tens of thousands of dollars. They don't cost hundreds of thousands of dollars  as some of the other treatments do. Okay. So hopefully that's a good intro to all of this stuff  and to talk about what we're going to get into.  Head and Neck Anatomy Review   [0:13:54]  09/01/25   Page   of 4   19

SSC 2.0 - 101: Anatomy Review Part 1  So we're going to start off with anatomy. I was a humanities major in college, so I like to  throw in some art history as we go through this too, just a little bit of art history. But this is  called the anatomy lesson. This is a classic Rembrandt. You know it's Rembrandt from the  use of light. All Rembrandt paintings are light in the center and kind of move out to the  side. I love the use of light here as if there is a light on these gentlemen looking at this ca -  daver here and the whiteness of their collars and things like that popping out. I think that's  pretty cool.  Embryology (Where it all began)   [0:14:35]  All right. So embryology. Embryology, this is where it all began. And the reason I start with  embryology is because I think it helps us to understand how things are connected. Okay.  And why this might happen. And watch as we go through this that there's going to be a  nut, an acorn, on the screen every once in a while. And that's going to indicate that I am  teaching something at that moment that if the patient presented with symptoms, you might  think, ah, that makes no sense.  [0:15:07]  You're kind of nutty on this. So we're always going to go back to our anatomy. We're going  to go back even as far as embryology so that we understand how these overlapping tis -  sues, how we have the facial nerve and the trigeminal nerve and the vagus nerve and the  hypoglossal nerve. We have all these different nerves in this area here and they're over -  lapping, if you will, and then how these different tissues interact with each other and how it  all makes sense. Okay. So if you remember back from your anatomy 100 years ago, let  me get my pointer on the screen here. So we have this trilaminar disc, ectoderm, meso -  derm, and endoderm. And through mesenchyme differentiation, we're going to have all of  their tissues of the body are going to come from one of these different discs.  Ectoderm   [0:15:55]  Our ectoderm, from the ectoderm we get our nervous system, sensory epithelium, the eye,  ear, nose, epidermis, mammary glands. I don't read all the slides to you. I know you can  read. Tooth enamel. Okay. So note the highlight there, tooth enamel from the ectoderm.  And actually to stay on that slide for a second, note that our tooth enamel and the central  nervous system are from the same embryological tissue.  [0:16:20]  And I think that's kind of fascinating. So there have been various disciplines over the years  that have given almost magical qualities to occlusion. There are some people that believe  this now. You can watch YouTube videos of people equilibrating patients and getting rid of  whatever their problem is. Now, sometimes that's like super duper placebo effect. And you  09/01/25   Page   of 5   19

SSC 2.0 - 101: Anatomy Review Part 1  can tell because the person online is like, okay, I dusted their second molar and then they  lift him up and they're like, hey, you feel better now, don't you? Or they'll palpate their lat -  eral pterygoid. And how they do that is they put their pinky in their mouth and you don't  even see their knuckle disappear. There's no way they're even, they're not even this close  to the lateral pterygoid, but they'll be like, ah, that doesn't hurt anymore, does it? Okay,  that's placebo. Nevertheless, I have known some people over the years that have done  relatively very, very minimal occlusal equilibration and patients have at least reported pret -  ty significant changes in all sorts of stuff, crazy kind of stuff. Well, maybe, maybe there is a  connection. Maybe this embryology of the central nervous system and the tooth enamel  coming from the same embryological tissue, maybe that's why some of these people have  these seemingly bizarre reactions to this.  [0:17:47]  Did you know that the acupuncture meridians go through the teeth? Interesting. So if they  go through the teeth, that means there's sort of a disconnect there that if their teeth aren't  together, then there'd be a connection of that circuit. Okay, so again, don't have any stuff  to teach you on that, and that may send you down some rabbit hole that you can enjoy  learning more about those types of things. But if that does exist, or if it even exists in a cer -  tain patient, maybe that's why. Maybe there is an anatomical reason for some of that  seemingly weird stuff that can happen.  Mesoderm   [0:18:55]  All right, mesoderm. Here's our muscles, all of our connective tissue derivatives, and this  is the inside of the tooth, dentin, pulp, cementum, PDL. And I'm not going to make a claim  there that the inside of the tooth and muscles have some sort of connection the same way  that the outside of the tooth does, but I think it's fascinating that the tooth itself, the enamel  and then the rest of the tooth, are different embryological structures. Isn't that interesting?  [0:18:55]  And I know you remember from dental school, you had your ameloblast and the denti -  noblast, and they're kind of together, and then they go away from each other, and then the  ameloblast, of course, they're gone at the end, and that's why we don't make more enam -  el, in spite of what the toothpaste commercials might tell you. But the ameloblast are gone,  the dentinoblast are still there because they're on the inside of the tooth. Maybe that's why  it is formed that way. Endoderm is our GI tract and all of our associated glands.  Brachial Arches - Mandibular (1st) Arch   [0:18:55]  Okay, brachial arches. So our brachial arches is where most of the stuff in our head and  neck is going to come from. We're just going to kind of look at the first two, the mandibular  09/01/25   Page   of 6   19

SSC 2.0 - 101: Anatomy Review Part 1  arch and the hyoid arch. And with the mandibular first arch, we get our trigeminal nerve,  and then all the rest of the stuff on the screen. There are muscles of mastication, myelo -  hyoid, anterior belly digastric, tensor tympani, tensor belly palatine, those muscles. And so  what nerve do you think innervates the muscles of mastication, the myelohyoid, anterior  belly digastric, etcetera.? Trigeminal, right? And that's because they came from the same  embryological tissue. So the trigeminal nerve, all of those muscles, including or continuing  on, we get our malleus and incus, anterior ligament of the malleus, some other ligaments  there, sphenoid bone, lower lip, lower face, and the mandible.  Hyoid (2nd) Arch   [0:20:12]  So this is going to make sense of why the trigeminal nerve innervates those different tis -  sues. Moving on to our second or hyoid arch, we get our facial nerve, stapedius muscle,  muscles of facial expression, posterior belly digastric, and digastric, a crazy muscle. So  the front part is trigeminal nerve, the back part is facial nerve. Weird, right? So what nerve  do you think innervates all the muscles on the screen there? Well, of course, the facial  nerve, and that's the same thing. It's because that's the same tissues that they came from,  the nerve and those muscles and other tissues. Okay, here we have little pieces of the  malleus and incus. So even that second hyoid arch is going to have something to do with  the ossicles in your ear, our hyoid bone. And again, these are going to interact with each  other. So our trigeminal nerve and our facial nerve are kind of primarily involved in TMJ  disorders, facial pain, and things like that. And so that's why we kind of start with this. All  right, now let's talk about osteology. So in these netter drawings, I love that the soft tissue  is there, and then the hard tissue forms around it.  [0:21:36]  Okay, so this is important to remember. The soft tissue is there, the hard tissue forms  around it. And we have our infantile skull and, of course, our adult skull. And what would  you say is the biggest difference between the infantile skull and the adult skull? Well, I  would propose to you not that it's the sutures and stuff like that closed, although that is, of  course, one of the cases. But look at the mid and lower face here, right? So we have our  toothless baby, and then over here we have our full-grown adult, and there's a massive  difference in the mid and lower face here. Now, this creates the foundation for, frankly, a  ton of what we do in Spencer Study Club, which is Temporomandibular Disorders and  Sleep Apnea. If there is not proper growth and development of the mid and lower face, the  person's going to be more likely to have an airway problem. If they have an airway prob -  lem, they're potentially going to be more likely to clench and grind their teeth to try to pro -  tect their airway. There's going to be other issues because our brain, to address this right  now, right up front at this point in anatomy, what does our brain care more about?  [0:22:50]  09/01/25   Page   of 7   19

SSC 2.0 - 101: Anatomy Review Part 1  Air or proper growth and development? Air or a deficient maxilla? Air or retronathia? Air,  right? So even if we have these problems, your brain isn't going to be like, all right, I need  to put all my effort towards growing this mid and lower face anteriorly to give myself a bet -  ter airway. It's worried about the next breath, and so people can develop mouth breathing,  and they can develop all sorts of things with their hypertrophied adenoids and all the stuff  that we're going to talk about when we talk more about sleep apnea, but it comes back to  here. So this is where you might be an orthodontist watching this, and this is why I con -  gratulate you if you are an orthodontist or a pedodontist, because you're getting involved in  this right at the front end. Now, if you are not an orthodontist or a pedodontist, you proba -  bly also see kids in your practice, and you're getting involved with this, and maybe you  don't. Maybe you're like me in my practices, where we basically just see adults, but we  recognize these things. I have six grandchildren as of the recording of this video, and I've  given my grandkids things to help them avoid using the pacifiers and to help them do  things to help appropriately grow their jaws and whatnot.  [0:24:06]  One of our grandchildren needed a tongue tie release, and I'm kind of watching all of these  things. I have one grandson right now who spends a lot of time with his mouth open, and  so I've asked his mom and dad, is he sleeping with his mouth open? Is there something  we need to get checked out there? So I'm a big believer in checking these things early in  this growth and development stage and doing the best we can to help encourage proper  growth and development. Now, does that mean that you're going to eliminate airway is -  sues just by having proper growth and development? No way. And I think sometimes  there's companies that make an insane claims of what they're going to do with their little  magic pieces of plastic. But having said that, I think that it makes sense to give your child,  grandchild, niece, nephew, whatever, the best growth and development you can. And  again, my six children, not my six grandkids, I have six grandkids right now as I'm filming  this, my six children, all of them have all their teeth. They don't have wisdom teeth, but  they don't have premolar extraction like I did.  [0:25:16]  And yeah, we can debate, and the orthodontic community is like, no, that has nothing to  do with it, but come on, right? So if we make the garage smaller and the car of the tongue  is pretty big, it's got to go somewhere. So it just kind of makes sense that there could be a  problem with this in an individual. Is there a problem if we look epidemiologically? If we  look at many, many, many people, is there a statistical significant difference? I don't know.  And I don't care because I don't treat statistics, and neither do you. You treat individuals,  you treat patients, okay? So my soapbox here, I'm standing on, I should actually have a  soapbox, and I could stand up higher, and then you would know I was on my soapbox. So  that's one of my soapbox is do everything you can to help with proper growth and devel -  opment, but don't make stupid claims, okay? Don't be out there saying that all kids have to  have their tongue tie released or all kids have to do this. Treat an individual, and your local  medical dental community will respect you a lot more if you aren't a wide-eyed crazy per -  son on these things.  09/01/25   Page   of 8   19

SSC 2.0 - 101: Anatomy Review Part 1  [0:26:21]  And if you recognize, yeah, I think there's individual variability. I think there's people who  are retrognathic that don't have sleep apnea. I think that, however, for me and my family,  I'm going to try to do the best that I can for them to give them a leg up in case, you know,  they put on 25 pounds when they're 30 years old, and that's going to really strain their air -  way even if it's an ideal growth and development patient, putting on that weight is going to  be a problem, okay? So that's enough on that. Just, again, we are involved in this. Even if  you see adults, you can have influence in your local community. I encourage you to reach  out to orthodontists in your community, to pediatric dentists in your community, and teach  them these things and talk to them as colleagues and let them know you're there to help.  Cranial Bones   [ 0:27:10]  Okay, cranial bones. We have our occipital, frontal, parietal, temporal, sphenoid, and eth -  moid. The facial bones, vomer, lacrimal, nasal bones, inferior nasal concha, zygomatic  bone, maxilla, and the mandible. Soft tissue is there, kind of bone forms around it, and  then we have the nerves that were there before, and the bone forms around those, and  that's how we get foramina.  [0:27:33]  So the foramen ovale, for example, that we'll talk about in a second, is oval because the  mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve is oval. Foramen rotundum, round, is round be -  cause the maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve is round. Okay, so soft tissue is there,  hard tissue forms around it. Now, if you've been a member of Spencer Study Club for a  while, you've seen me lecture, you've seen this picture before, and I wrote a paper on this  when I was in college, and I did not come up with this idea, but since I was a humanities  major that was pre-dental, I was really interested in anatomy, and I was going to dental  school and stuff like that. Actually, I was pre-med at the beginning, but I changed to pre-  dental about my junior year. And the idea here, and why I show this, is that this shape  around God, this of course is the so-called creation of Adam by Michelangelo, this is in the  Sistine Chapel, this is not the center panel of the Sistine Chapel, it is near the center, and  this shape around God is curious.  [0:28:45]  So that should sort of look familiar based on the brain that I have above   it, and I actually  tracked down one of the studies that I looked at when I was coming up with this paper and  stuff like this, and so here it is, Michelangelo, the creation of Adam from the Sistine Chapel  ceiling, and in comparison with the structure of the human brain. So here is an anatomist  has gone through and shown, kind of drawn all of this stuff. Now, you know, granted, you  can go outside and lay on the ground and see a turtle in a cloud and see, you know, what -  ever else out there if you're looking for it, so is this kind of, what do they call it, kind of se -  lection bias that I'm looking for something and I see it? I don't think it is. I think that  09/01/25   Page   of 9   19

SSC 2.0 - 101: Anatomy Review Part 1  Michelangelo used this shape on purpose because if we look at our painting here, even  though it's called the creation of Adam, Adam's created. Adam's already alive. He's awake.  His eyes are open, and God is reaching out to give him something. Maybe Michelangelo  was using, through his artistic ways here, saying maybe God was giving Adam knowledge,  and so he wanted to use the brain, which they knew at that point was the fountain or the  focus of knowledge.  [0:30:04]  Maybe he did that on purpose. So that's just a little fun thing for you. Maybe that is the  case. Okay, moving on. So this is the portion of the show where if I were doing this live, I  would kind of point and then have you yell. You can do this at home. You can do this if  your family's around you and you've got earphones in. They'll think that you're crazy, but  that's okay. Let's see how well you do. So let's go ahead. This is the what? Frontal. This is  the? Okay, so if you are like 98% of those that I lecture to, you probably didn't get that one.  Probably frontal. You're like, I got it. Frontal, right on. Next one, you're like, I don't remem -  ber that. So that's the parietal. Okay, back here we have our occipital, temporal, sphenoid,  zygomatic. This one you know. Maxilla, right on. How about this one? Yep, mandible. You  know that one too. Okay, this one you probably remember. Nasal. This one, maybe not.  Maybe you remember that one. Starts with an L, lacrimal, good. And then this one here is  ethmoid. Let's do at least some of those from the front.  [0:31:11]  So here's our frontal again. Here's the temporal over here. Here's the sphenoid that we  saw on the outside there. Zygomatic bone, maxilla, of course again, mandible. And then  getting in here into the nose, we've got this here. And then if we look, here's that same  color. And here's that same color again. So what bone is that? So we talked about it on the  other view. That was the ethmoid bone. So if I back up a view actually. So the ethmoid  bone here as one of the bones of the orbit right there. And then going forward. So there it  is again. The view we just looked at. And then it's also the middle turbinet. And if we could  see all the way up here, it would also be the superior turbinet. And then it's the perpendicu -  lar plate of the ethmoid bone. So perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone. Anasimosis with  this bone here, which is called the vomer. You may remember that one. I don't know why  people remember that one so well, but they tend to. So the vomer and the perpendicular  plate of the ethmoid bone, those come together to form the nasal septum.  [0:32:11]  Now something I like to point out is here, this is the floor of the nose, which is the roof of  the mouth. So something that you can kind of amaze your patients with or your friends and  family is if you see someone that has a high arch palate, but they are normal cephalic. So  normal shaped face. They don't have a long face like I do. And they have a high arch  palate. So I have a long face and a high arch palate. But if I had a normal, not long face  and the high arch palate, what could you predict? Okay, so think about that. The roof of my  mouth is high, so it's kind of humped over there. Okay, that would mean that that perpen -  dicular plate and the vomer would have to be, they wouldn't be straight up and down. They  would have to move one way or the other. So that patient's going to have a deviated sep -  09/01/25   Page   of 10   19

SSC 2.0 - 101: Anatomy Review Part 1  tum. Okay, does that make sense? So high arch palate, normal cephalic, deviated septum,  almost guaranteed. So if you have that patient and you see the high arch palate, kind of  look at their face, they don't really have a long face, you can say, hey, do you have any  problem breathing through your nose at all?  [0:33:18]  And they will almost always say, well, I have a problem breathing through the right side.  You know, your left side's fine, right side, I don't breathe through, you know, at all or very  well. That can be really important with people having a potential airway issue, because if  they don't breathe through their nose well, what are they going to do? They're going to  have a tendency, a greater tendency to mouth breathe. And if they have a tendency to  mouth breathe, then that can be a problem too. So getting that patient to an ear, nose and  throat doctor and having that repaired can literally change their life and change it fast. So  watch for that in your practice, watch for that. Again, the reason I don't have a deviated  septum is because I have a longer face. So I have the high arch palate, but those bones  are up higher because I have a longer face overall. Okay, so hopefully that is helpful to you  to watch for that clinically. I think we sort of ignore the deviated septum quite a bit.  [0:34:14]  A ton of our patients have this. I strongly encourage you to get a relationship with an ear,  nose and throat doctor. Talk to them about this. Talk to them about what can you look for to  know who to refer to them. Because these nasal procedures, ear, nose and throat doctors  really like doing those procedures. They are very effective. The patient has a great out -  come. Nowadays, they do things that are not that painful for the patient. A lot of these  things are outpatient procedures. They don't have to have their nose packed usually any -  more. So talk to an ENT about that. See what you can do. Watch for this. Especially if you  do see kids in your practice and you plan to send those ENTs, kiddos that need their ton -  sils and adenoids out every once in a while, ENTs in general do not like doing those pro -  cedures. I will talk about that later when we're talking about the sleep apnea stuff, but  they're paid really, really terribly for those. So again, I would try to send like 10 nasal sep -  tum and turbinate reduction procedures for every one tonsilodenoidectomy that I would  send. All right, let's talk about our bony openings in the skull.  Bony Openings of the Skull (Analogy)   [0:35:23]  But before I do, I have a little analogy to work with you here. And so what is this on the  screen? So on the slides here, this is a GFI, right? So ground fault interrupter. And a little  story. So this happened a long time ago, but years and years ago, my wife and I built a  house. This was when we lived in Idaho and we built a house in the outskirts of the Boise  area where our practice was. And Jenny designed the house and it was really awesome.  And after we'd moved in the house a few weeks, I came home one day from work and  tried to open the garage doors and the garage door wouldn't open. I'm like, huh, weird.  09/01/25   Page   of 11   19

SSC 2.0 - 101: Anatomy Review Part 1  And again, new house, new clicker, batteries should have been working by then. So I get  out of the car and I go into the garage and I push the button on the wall that's hardwired to  the garage door opener and nothing opened. Okay, so now I know it's not my clicker.  There's not power going to the garage door opener. So I went and I checked the breaker  box, right?  [0:36:34]  So that's kind of the next thing. And now that I know there's no power there, I'm trying to  figure out, well, why is there no power? So I go to the breaker box that's in the garage and  nothing was popped. I go into the main house breaker box, nothing's popped. Hmm. Now  I'd had a similar situation with this with an older house that we'd lived in before, before we  built this house, where a GFI had been popped and then that made it so that a circuit,  some plugs in the house didn't work, particularly this was outside. So if we had GFIs that  were outside and those would pop and then a circuit wouldn't work. And by the way, where  are these in your house? They're usually by water, right? So I go through the house, look -  ing in the garage first, and I think there were a couple of GFIs in the garage, if I remember  correctly, and then nothing's popped. And my GFIs looked exactly like this, by the way. So  they didn't have a little light. If we were to build a house again, I would make sure I had the  ones with a little light.  [0:37:35]  So I go through and eventually I find in Jenny's craft room that there was a hot glue gun  plugged in and apparently it had been left on and so it drew too much power and it popped  the breaker that it was plugged into, the GFI. I reset the GFI and then I went out and  pushed the garage door opener and my garage doors opened. And here's my theory. My  theory is that these electricians do this kind of stuff on purpose. So they are, you know,  here they are at night, you know, getting together after a long day of work and they're like,  hey, you won't believe what I did with this guy's house. I connected his wife's craft room on  the same circuit as his garage door openers. And that thing's going to pop and the garage  door is not going to work and they're going to have to call me out there and I'm going to  make a big to-do about it and charge him 150 bucks and pop that breaker or pop that GFI  back and then everything will work and it'll be like a miracle. And I won't really tell him what  I did. I would just say, yeah, I fixed the problem, and then it will happen again down the  road.  [0:38:30]  I’m sure that's not the case, but the point is, what if we were hanging out and you and I  were at my house, that house that we lived in, and let's say that you were visiting and we  drive up to my house, I'm in my car, and I push the garage door opener to open my garage  doors, and they don't open. And you see me push the button, and you see that the garage  doors don't open, and you're thinking, that's weird. But we're talking about TMG stuff and  anatomy and embryology, and we're having a good old time, and I don't even react to the  fact that the garage doors don't open because we're in this conversation. And I get out of  the car, and I just kind of walk and show you into the house, and you're like, that's strange  that he didn't do the garage doors. And then you follow me, and I'm like, hey, come with  09/01/25   Page   of 12   19

SSC 2.0 - 101: Anatomy Review Part 1  me, I just got to do something real quick. And I go through the house, go to this room that  you then realize is my wife's craft room, I push to reset a GFI, don't even say what I'm do -  ing, we turn around, we walk back out, I push the garage door opener, the garage doors  open, I park my car.  [0:39:36]  You would be like, is Jamison an electrical savant or something? How in the world did he  know that his garage door openers were connected to his wife's craft room GFI? Well, how  I knew was because I knew the pattern. And from then on out, I knew the pattern. And you  may have this exact experience at your home, that you know that when you set up the  Christmas lights or something like that, and something like, like we have Christmas lights  at our house outside, and if it snows a bunch, then there's little connections that will short  out, and then I know that that turns off the freezers that we have in the garage, which is a  real problem, except it's winter, so that's kind of nice. But I know that we got to watch for  that, because they'll pop, and that is the circuit that it's on. And that's the reason that it will  pop. I bet you have something similar to that in your house. And again, the point is, once  you see the pattern, once you understand the pattern, it's not a mystery anymore.   This is  what anatomy gives you. If you can understand the underlying anatomy, and you under -  stand the things that are in place, the patterns, the connections, the interconnections, then  this whole mystery of TMD isn't so mysterious.  Foramena   [0:40:42]  All right, so back to our foramina, because I tell that story to segue into this right here. I'm  not going to cover all the different things that go through the different foramina, but I am  going to focus in on what we do as dentists and what we do with temporal mandibular dis -  orders. So we're going to kind of jump right down here to foramen rotundum. So foramen  rotundum, which is right there, so that's foramen rotundum. Superior orbital fissure, that's  for the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve, but that isn't involved in temporal  mandibular disorders that much. We will talk about it a little bit, but that's not involved that  much. Maxillary nerve, on the other hand, through rotundum, and then ovale for the  mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve. So superior orbital fissure, rotundum for V2,  and ovale for V3. All right, so this is the first time you've seen the nut on the screen. So the  meningeal branch of V3 goes through that hole right there called foramen spinosum.  [0:42:05]  So there is spinosum, and let's break that down. So meningeal branch of V3, meningeal  branch, meningeal. So the meninges are what? Covering up our brain, right? So the  meningeal branch, so in other words, the branch going to the meninges of V3. V3 is the  mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve. So question, now this question is technically  wrong, because I've already taught you that the soft tissue is there and then the bone  forms around it, right? But is the nerve going out spinosum, exiting spinosum, or entering,  09/01/25   Page   of 13   19

SSC 2.0 - 101: Anatomy Review Part 1  coming back towards the brain through spinosum? So think about that for a second. Is the  nerve entering the brain area or exiting away from the brain? Well, if it's the meningeal  branch going to the meninges, it's entering, isn't it? So what happens is the mandibular di -  vision of the trigeminal nerve exits, so to speak, ovale. Remember the soft tissue is there,  hard tissue forms around it. It goes through ovale, so to speak, and then there's a branch,  and then we have this other hole, spinosum, that had to form there because that branch  was there. Bottom line, the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve innervates the  meninges. Well, what clinical implications could that have?  [0:43:32]  Now, do you remember being taught that in dental school? That the mandibular division of  the trigeminal nerve innervates your covering of your brain? Probably not, right? What clin -  ical implications could that have? Headaches? You betcha. So here is, again, some  anatomy that you probably never really were taught in dental school because it's not just  V3. We talk about V3, that kind of opens up the discussion because of this foramen spin -  osum. But let's check this out. So, anterior cranial fossa, meningeal branches from the an -  terior posterior ethmoidal nerves off the nasociliary nerve from the ophthalmic division of  the trigeminal nerve. Okay, so here we go. So the front part of the meninges are oph -  thalmic division of the trigeminal nerve, V1. Okay, V1. Now let's move to middle cranial  fossa. Meningeal branches of ophthalmic, maxillary, and mandibular division of the trigem -  inal nerve are on the middle cranial fossa. What? Ophthalmic, maxillary, and mandibular  nerve. So the middle cranial fossa, we get the meninges by all three divisions of the  trigeminal nerve. Okay, and then it kind of goes into detail here on which with the maxilla  and which with the mandibular nerve. So, kind of going back to my analogy with the elec -  tricians there, what might you do as a dentist that could affect the maxillary nerve or the  mandibular nerve?  [0:45:08]  What type of stuff? Did you say an injection? Yeah. Did you say filling? Yeah. Did you say  a root canal? Yeah. Did you say extraction? Yeah. Did you say periodontal surgery? Yeah.  Did you say day near anything I ever do as a dentist? Other than perhaps sealants? Yeah.  So virtually anything you could do could trip the breaker. And this is perhaps an anatomical  reason why some patients will develop headaches after a dental procedure because of the  wiring. Again, you wouldn't be blown away like, oh, you know, it's so weird. This person  had some surgery on their lumbar spine, and now they have a weird sensation down their  leg. You'd be like, well, yeah, that makes sense. Okay, those are the nerves that are in -  volved. Or this person had a neck injury, and now they have a weird sensation down their  arm. You'd be like, well, yeah, brachial plexus, that makes sense anatomically. But you  were never taught this. You were never taught that the meninges of the brain are innervat -  ed by the maxillary and the mandibular nerve and the ophthalmic nerve, the trigeminal  nerve, our nerve, the dental nerve, if you will. Okay, so keep that in mind.  [0:46:40]  And now here's a strong point that I need to make, because this is one of the bummers  with temporomandibular disorders in general, is let's say that you did a root canal, and the  09/01/25   Page   of 14   19

SSC 2.0 - 101: Anatomy Review Part 1  patient started having headaches afterwards. But their tooth doesn't hurt anymore, be -  cause the nerve is taken care of, and the root canal is done well, so they don't have pain  anymore. There's nothing there to send pain signals, but that sort of trips the trigger there,  trips the breaker that causes them to have headaches. Are they going to bring it up to  you? Probably not. If they had a root canal down here, and then they have a headache up  here, why are they talking to their dentist about it? Do you normally go to a dentist be -  cause of headaches? Well, only if it seems to be related to a toothache. So this is part of  the ships passing in the night of temporomandibular disorders that can make people a little  NUTS, right? Because they go to the neurologist, and the neurologist is like, oh my gosh, it  sounds like you've got a brain tumor. They usually don't say that out loud.  [0:47:51]  But the neurologist is like, okay, weird, let's get an MRI, let's rule out bad stuff, let's get a  CAT scan, and they don't see anything. Everything's fine. And so then they're kind of tak -  ing them through migraine diagnosis and stuff like that, and that frankly doesn't make any  sense. So then they're thinking, well, maybe it's tension headache, and everybody's under  tension, maybe it's stress, everybody's under stress. So then they might treat them with  medications, and maybe it helps, maybe it doesn't. And this can be really bad for people.  Now you may be asking, well, what the heck am I supposed to do about that? Well, how  you would treat it might be related to how it started. So if somebody did have a headache  and it went back to this original dental procedure, maybe you could do something to turn  off that nerve. Maybe you could do actually another injection and reset the computer, I like  to call that. So if we knew that it was related to the mandibular division of the trigeminal  nerve, maybe if we go back and give them another inferior alveolar nerve block, maybe  that can turn off the headaches.  [0:48:55]  And we've seen this time and time again with our   patients, and be that either a nerve block  and a diagnostic injection, something with their muscles, and this having an effect that ac -  tually didn't really make sense at the time. You were able to turn that pain off and then it  never came back. And you're like, that's weird. Because if it was a musculoskeletal prob -  lem, it would probably come back, right? So like if my foot hurts from running and you give  me an anesthetic injection where it hurts, and I'm like, well, that feels better, you would ex -  pect that as soon as the anesthetic wore off that it would hurt again because there's like an  underlying injury. But in these cases with certain headaches, it just goes away. And that  kind of is like that resetting the GFI. All right, so long discussion of that. And again, I hope  that to impress upon you with all of that, that there's this anatomy going on in the back -  ground, that sometimes some of these kind of crazy things can make sense if we under -  stand the anatomy. All right, back to our trigeminal nerve here. So here we have the maxil -  la, obviously. We'll talk about the palatine nerves here in a bit.  09/01/25   Page   of 15   19

SSC 2.0 - 101: Anatomy Review Part 1  Facial Nerve   [0:49:57]  So let's talk about the facial nerve first, then we'll get more into the maxillary and the  mandibular nerve and the ophthalmic nerve. So facial nerve is interesting, I think, because  it is covered by a bunch of bones. So remember the soft tissue's there, bone forms around  it. So this is all in the temporal bone. So this is our facial nerve going into what's called the  internal acoustic medius. And within all of this temporal bone here, there's a branch that  comes off, and that branch is called the chorda tympani. So the tympani part is the tym -  panic membrane, and then I guess the chord part comes down here. And do you remem -  ber what the chorda tympani had to do with? Does that ring a bell? So the chorda tympani  of the facial nerve anastomoses with the lingual nerve of the mandibular division of the  trigeminal nerve, and that goes to the tongue, the lingual nerve, with the chorda tympani.  And what does it have to do with? Taste, right? Taste of the anterior two-thirds of the  tongue. That's why the facial nerve is special sensory for taste to the tongue. So some -  what oddly, if I was to touch my tongue, that would be the lingual division of the trigeminal  nerve.  [0:51:07]  If I was to taste something on my finger, then that would be facial nerve. Crazy, right? Now,  since the anastomose right there together, if you give someone inferior alveolar nerve  block, they're not going to taste either because you've taken out both of those nerves  where they've come together. If there was a way to, you know, if you got up way higher  and just took out the lingual nerve, then the touch would not come back, but taste still  would. You're never going to do that, so don't worry about it. But that's how those nerves  come together. The chorda tympani and the lingual nerve come together for anterior two-  thirds of the tongue for taste. By the way, this also goes through the parotid gland here.  So, the facial nerve goes through the parotid gland and then gives off its five branches.  You may remember those from dental school. I think it's like two zebras bought my car. So,  temporal, zygomatic, buccal, marginal mandibular, cervical. Those are the branches of the  facial nerve. Who cares, right? You did memorize that once for a test and haven't used it  ever since. The reason you want to now know that the facial nerve goes through the  parotid gland, though, is you're going to learn, I hope, in Spencer Study Club how to give  what I call injections outside the deep, dark hole.  [0:52:25]  And one of the main injections outside the deep, dark hole is into the jaw joint. And you will  use anesthetic to do what we call an unlocking procedure. We will also teach you, or you  may know already because you've been a member of Spencer Study Club for a while, how  to do platelet-rich fibrin injections into the jaw joint or other regenerative medicine-type  procedures, exosomes, things like that. The anesthetic, though, is kind of our, I won't say  concern, but it allows us, if we understand the anatomy, to know exactly where our needle  was. If you're shooting PRF, a blood product, or exosomes or something like that, you  wouldn't know necessarily exactly where you were until you are expert at giving these  09/01/25   Page   of 16   19

SSC 2.0 - 101: Anatomy Review Part 1  shots. We are now teaching, and if you take this course or by the time you've watched this,  maybe you've already taken the course, you know that we're also doing ultrasound-guided  injections now. That helps. But even with the ultrasound, you can still miss. For example,  when we were first learning to do ultrasound-guided injections, we had a course where we  had an interventional radiologist come. This happened just recently, as a matter of fact, as  I'm recording this video.  [0:53:39]  The interventional radiologist helped the dentist with the ultrasound, and they were able  to... I was the patient, and they were able to visualize my joint and the joint space. Then  one of the dentists there gave me an injection thinking that it was in the joint space based  on the ultrasound, the ultrasound guidance there. When he gave me the shot...and I think  he kind of gave me a little bit of anesthetic and then maybe a little bit more... And the  things that we look for, we'll talk about this later. This will be in level three as you learn  about injections outside the deep, dark hole. But if you put fluid into the capsule, it makes  it so the person can't bite their teeth together because it puts a space in their capsule so  their condyle can't seat all the way. At first, I was kind of like, well, yep, yep, my bite's off a  little bit, so he must have got some fluid in my capsule. But then my tongue got numb and  my lip got numb, so he had given me a reverse gow-gates. I'll point this out on another pic -  ture when we get to the mandibular nerve in just a second.  [0:54:50]  Sometimes it's just that   so he was not in the capsule. He was behind the condyle and gave  me what I call a reverse gow-gates or an external gow-gates, which, by the way, might be  handy for you to know how to do that in case someone was so swollen that they couldn't  open their mouth or something, and you needed to get them numb externally. That might  be a handy trick up your sleeve to have. Now, if he would have been superficial, which is  what I'm getting at with this story, if he would have been superficial, then he would have hit  my parotid gland. As you see, that's right over the jaw joint there. So again, parotid gland  is right here. Here's my ear. So the jaw joint is right under that. If he would have put anes -  thetic into the parotid gland, then half of my face would have not worked anymore because  the facial nerve is motor. So the facial nerve is moved my face, right? And so if you give  someone a joint injection and you're superficial, it'll make it usually so that they can't blink.  Sometimes it'll be the whole side of their face.  [0:55:52]  The orbicularis oculi won't work anymore, so they can't close their eye. That's the beauty  of understanding your anatomy, because if you give the shot and then the patient's like,  hey, bite's off, you're like, great. And then a little bit later, you're like, anything else feel  weird or whatever? And they're like, no, just my bite's off. Perfect, you were there. If they're  like, well, actually, I can't feel up the side of my head. So that'd be a regular temporal  nerve that you caught. Or they're kind of like, well, no, everything's fine, except my face  feels really weird. And that's me moving my left side of my face and my right side of my  face not moving. Then that'd be like, oh, I tagged your facial nerve on the right side. Sorry  about that. Or if they're like, well, actually, you know what? My tongue is super numb and  09/01/25   Page   of 17   19

SSC 2.0 - 101: Anatomy Review Part 1  my lip is super numb on the bottom. Is that normal? Well, yeah, because I gave you a re -  verse gow-gates. Okay, so that's a long story to just help you understand the anatomy of  the jaw joint, which is kind of awesome. Because if you understand your anatomy, you're  going to know, possibly after the fact, where your needle was.  [0:56:56]  And the more you do this, you will be confident that you were in the right spot. Because  you will recognize, especially with local anesthetic injections, you will know what hap -  pened. And based on the outcome of that injection, you will know, I was in the capsule. I  was not in the capsule. I was superficial. I was deep. You will know that. And then you can  actually do another injection if you want to once you have that information. Because  everybody's anatomy is a little bit different. All right, so style of mastoid foramen, that's  where the facial nerve comes out. And we've talked enough about the facial nerve.  Ophthalmic Division - Trigeminal Nerve   [0:56:56]  Ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve is, as I mentioned before, not typically implicat -  ed in temporomandibular disorders. Certain types of headaches, and clearly it's all the  same wiring, right? So it's the craft room and the garage doors again. The craft room  wasn't attached to my neighbor's house. So the wiring is still connected there. So people  can definitely have pain in their forehead, along their nose, things like that. And that could  be related to the other divisions of the trigeminal nerve just being interpreted by that oph -  thalmic division. But in general, ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve is not some -  thing that you're going to deal with on a regular basis.  Maxillary Division - Trigeminal Nerve   [0:58:12]  Maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve is also not implicated a lot in temporomandibular  disorders as much as the mandibular nerve is. And we'll talk about that in just a second  why that is. But as a dentist, maxillary nerve is very important to you. And so let's spend a  little time talking about it and how you can block the maxillary nerves. If you don't know  how to do this, I think this can be very helpful for you as a general dentist. Because if  you're like me in dental school, we learned how to infiltrate. So we just give shots up in the  maxilla and it would infiltrate. And that's because in dental school, mostly you're working  on a tooth or you're doing a bridge. And even if you did a bridge, you'd probably give two  shots. In my experience, the people who learn what I'm about to describe are hygienists.  So hygienists will typically learn how to block the maxilla. So do a block in the maxilla, just  like you would block the mandible. And then of course, oral surgeons know how to do this.  So if you want to learn how to do this, we might be able to teach you this at one of our  courses. Or easy way to do it is get with a local periodontist or oral surgeon. I said or -  09/01/25   Page   of 18   19

SSC 2.0 - 101: Anatomy Review Part 1  thodontist. Orthodontists don't do little shots. Don't go to an orthodontist for learning how to  do shots.  [0:59:27]  So oral surgeon or periodontist, they do this all the time and they can teach you how to do  this. So this is a maxillary nerve block via the greater palatine canal. So here's a study  from very recently, or as I am videoing this content, it's recent anyway, so 2024. And the  story on this is that we are going to go up the greater palatine canal, up the canal, in order  to block the maxillary nerve.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 19   19

