SSC 2.0 - 314: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 1  SSC 2.0   Level 3  314: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 1  [intro music]  Injections Outside of the Deep, Dark, Hole (and One Inside)   [0:00:12]  Welcome to injections outside the deep dark hole and one inside. In this series of lectures,  we're going to talk about giving the injections that you normally would not give as a dentist,  but that are specific for TMJ problems. Sometimes those TMJ problems being related to  treating someone for sleep apnea. We're going to focus on myofascial trigger points, which  is what this lecture is going to be about, enthesis, which you probably never heard that  term before, but that's going to be things like temporal tendonitis, and then the joint itself.  We'll also have another one about unlocking, which involves a TM joint injection. But these  are going to be our series on injections outside the deep dark hole. And why I refer to it as  that is dentists are scared to give shots outside the deep dark hole. Medical doctors typi -  cally are scared to give shots inside the deep dark hole. I remember once a neurologist  contacting me, and he was from a city a few hours away from Boise, and he said, Jami -  son, I think I have a patient that might have trigeminal neuralgia. I'm trying to do a differen -  tial diagnosis, and they have pain in their mandible area.  [0:01:28]  What could I do or what could be done in order to rule out that it's something else local in  that area, not in their brain itself? And I said, well, you would give an inferior alveolar nerve  block. You'd give a dental block. And they're like, well, how do I do that? Well, I said, well,  typically how we do it is intraorally. There are ways to do it extraorally, but intraorally gives  you kind of a direct approach to the inferior alveolar nerve. And he's like, whoa, you know,  I don't think I could do that. And I said, well, get a hold of any dentist in town, and they are  probably doing it right this minute. So physicians in general, when they're giving blocks to  nerves too, they're going to try to do it under live x-ray, or they're going to try to use ultra -  sound guidance. And you just do this all the time, just like it's nothing because you've done  this so many times. So for you, injections inside the deep dark hole, no big deal. For our  medical colleagues, pretty big deal. When we go outside the deep dark hole, this is when  you start to get a little bit nervous.  Myofascial Pain Dysfunction & Trigger Point Injections   [0:02:29]  09 /01/25   Page   of 1   14

SSC 2.0 - 314: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 1  All right, so again, in this lecture, we're going to talk about myofascial trigger points, trigger  points. Now, note that the term here is myofascial pain dysfunction, MPD, myofascial pain  dysfunction, and that is associated with trigger points. And it's myofascial, not myofacial. A  big tell for me that someone doesn't know what they're doing or that an insurance compa -  ny doesn't know what they're doing is when they have the term myofacial pain instead of  fascial. The term is myofascial pain because it seems to incorporate the fascia. And when  we get into our trigger point injections and whatnot, the first time you do this, you will rec -  ognize that because you will note that oftentimes you will get this local twitch response that  I'll talk about way before, very superficial. And you'll be thinking, I didn't really have time to  get to the muscle itself and I got this local twitch response. So the fascia can be involved.  [0:03:42]  Perhaps this is also why we have this referred pain patterns is because the fascia is in -  volved and the fascia kind of all connects. There's some sweet YouTube videos on that. If  you've not seen that before, there's someone that gives like a TED talk and they have a  fascial suit and so whenever they move someplace, it shows how that fascia moving one  place can kind of go to another place. You may have heard of crazy stories of people hav -  ing like a tongue tie release and they feel it down in their feet that could have something to  do with this fascia that covers all of our muscles and we'll also talk in this section about  acupuncture points. And some people believe that the acupuncture meridians follow fas -  cial planes. So it's fascia, not facial.  Myofascial Pain   [0:04:30]  Myofascial pain is defined by musculoskeletal disorders that cause pain in the area of the  muscle in the body. So pain in the muscle directly. And then we can also have these char -  acteristic referred   pain patterns. That is also similar to our definition of a trigger point,  which I'll give in a moment. So myofascial pain and trigger points go together. Myofascial  pain and trigger points go together. So pain locally, but you can also have these trigger  points with characteristic referred pain patterns.  [video playback]  So here's kind of a little video of a trigger points. We have an active trigger point in the  sternocleidomastoid. The person will feel it in their tooth as well as their sternocleidomas -  toid. When we anesthetize the tooth, because the pain is not actually coming from the  tooth, they'll still feel pain in that area.  [end of video playback]  [0:05:19]  So this can be confusing because the pain and the site and the source of the pain are not  the same thing. So myofascial trigger points typically have these characteristic referred  pain patterns. And when you go to the area that the patient says it hurts, anesthetize that  area, it can still hurt because this area in the brain that is picking up these pain signals, it's  09 /01/25   Page   of 2   14

SSC 2.0 - 314: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 1  really close to each other. A way that I kind of like to think about this is, you've heard be -  fore, if somebody's having a heart attack, their arm will hurt, right? They're like, oh my  gosh, my arm hurts, or their jaw will hurt.  [0:05:55]  And part of the reason that is, is because the area of pain in your cerebral cortex that's  picking up this pain signal from the heart is near the same place that gets pain signals  from your arm or your jaw. And your brain is more used to getting those signals from those  areas, so it kind of misinterprets this pain from your heart, because that's new, that's a new  sensation. So similar with trigger points is the person's brain is trying to figure out where all  these signals are coming from, and these wires can kind of get crossed, and so it can be  confusing, obviously, for the patient and for you as the doctor, because you're trying to just  figure out where their pain actually is.  Causes of Myofascial Pain   [0:06:52]  Causes of myofascial pain could be repetitive motion or postures, for example, being a  dentist. A lot of dentists and dental professionals have myofascial pain and myofascial  trigger points in their shoulders, in their neck, down their back, all sorts of places. And I've  treated multiple dental professionals over my career, particularly hygienists, with trigger  points in their back muscles that were making it so that they couldn't even practice. Now  the bummer, if that is the etiology of your myofascial pain, is what are you going to do  about it? Because you're going to continue going back to that posture. So there are defi -  nitely postural remedies, there are things that you can do to get better posture. One of our  Spencer Study Club members, his wife is a physical therapist that has really focused her  career on posture and has a technique called posturedontics, where she teaches dental  professionals how to sit correctly, proper use of loops, things like that. So if you have these  problems, you can use this section to figure out how to treat the problem, but getting to the  etiology and changing that etiology whenever possible is obviously going to be better.  [0:08:07]  Repetitive overuse of muscles, muscle trauma, or parafunction, so-called parafunction,  right? So clenching, grinding the teeth, we're going to say, all right, they're using their  masseter muscle, their temporalis muscle too much. This is why they have pain or trigger  points in that muscle. Certainly could be. Is it parafunction? I know we come back to that  over and over again to reinforce this idea because I'm sure you've been taught much be -  fore that we don't really understand the reason they have the parafunction. We just want to  put in an NTI. We just want to put in a whatever. When in doubt, rule it out. When in doubt,  rule it out. If you think that they might have a sleep issue that is resulting in their trying to  protect their airway so they don't die, consider that because that would be a good reason  for them to have trigger points. What do you think the brain cares more about? Pain in the  masseter and resultant pain in the teeth due to trigger points or air? Probably air, right?  09 /01/25   Page   of 3   14

SSC 2.0 - 314: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 1  Trigger Points   [0:09:04]  All right, so let's define a trigger point. This is from Travell and Simons Myofascial Pain and  Dysfunction, volume one book. There's two volumes. Volume one is more the upper body  that we're going to be dealing with. I strongly encourage you to seek out this book or you  could probably nowadays just ask ChatGPT or some other AI program to summarize all of  this book. It's about that thick and it would probably give you a pretty good summary of it.  But this is really, really good content on how muscles work. So muscle function and mus -  cle dysfunction. When I read this book, which I did, I didn't read the whole thing because it  gets into all sorts of trigger points in volume one in the arms and in areas of the body that  we don't treat as dentists. But those first couple chapters that give you the normal muscle  physiology and whatnot were really, really valuable to me. So I would strongly consider  you checking this out or getting a summary of it. But now reading from the slide here, a  hyper-irritable spot and skeletal muscle associated with a hypersensitive palpable nodule  in a top band. So those bands, those knots that you have in a muscle when you get a  massage, that could be a myofascial trigger point.  [0:10:27]  What’s the difference between just a top band and a trigger point? Well, this next sentence  here, the spot is painful on compression and can give rise to characteristic referred pain,  referred tenderness, motor dysfunction, and autonomic phenomenon. So if you are getting  that massage and they're kind of working that point and you feel it kind of go up your head  or go down into your back or out into your shoulder or stuff like that, that's more likely a  trigger point. Now, a trigger point could just hurt right there local too, but this characteristic  referred pain is common with trigger points. Moving on, myofascial trigger points or focal  knots. Again, as we discussed, that's what your massage therapist is going to call them.  Located in a top band of skeletal muscle was first described by Dr. Travell in 1942. So  we've known about these for a long time. The points are usually palpable and produce this  characteristic referred pain that I just talked about. They can also have this local twitch re -  sponse. We'll talk more about that local twitch response when we get into treatment.  Types of Myofascial Trigger Points   [0:11:32]  Types of myofascial trigger points. So there's a bunch of trigger points and I'm not going to  go into detail on all these. These are all in the book or you could kind of look these up on -  line and learn more about them. But basically almost any musculoskeletal pain that you  could have that is involving the soft tissue could be called a trigger point by one of these  definitions, an active, an associated, an attachment, that's at the enthesis, which we've got  another section of the injections outside the deep dark hole that are just about enthesis,  09 /01/25   Page   of 4   14

SSC 2.0 - 314: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 1  and again, you could be, well, that's an enthesis trigger point perhaps, central, key, latent,  primary, and satellite. Okay, so again, not going to really define all of these things here. I'll  talk about some of these when we get into the treatment part, but you can look those up.  Not terribly important other than just kind of the confusion part there when people have  multiple trigger points and a key trigger point, to cover at least these right here, a key or  primary trigger point, if you get that, you will get rid of multiple trigger points, whereas a  satellite trigger point, if you treat that one, it will come back really quick because there was  another trigger point that was affecting that trigger point.  [0:12:59]  Again, if you've had a massage or something like that, you may have experienced this be -  fore, where sometimes you have someone and they get on that and just like all sorts of ar -  eas feel better and all are released, and then someone else kind of treats the sore area,  and then within a day or two it's sore again and you feel these other areas that weren't re -  ally taken care of. If you do get regular massage like my wife does, you get a massage  therapist that you trust and they're good at finding these things, and then if you can't get  into that massage therapist, you go to some other massage therapist, you find out, it's like,  oh, well, that person wasn't as good at finding those trigger points on me.  Any Myofascial Trigger Point is to be..   [0:13:38]  Any myofascial trigger point is to be distinguished from cutaneous, ligamentous, pe -  riosteal, or any other non-muscular trigger point. So if there's trigger points that are on the  other tissues, then this is not a myofascial trigger point. So again, this gets a little bit com -  plex, but we're going to kind of keep it simple because thank goodness in the head and  neck area, it actually is pretty simple.  [video playback]  So here are some trigger points in the masseter muscle. We have our animation here go -  ing on showing this referred pain. The light bright dot there is indicating the trigger point. In  the Trebell and Simons pictures here, we have our black X's. Our black X's are the trigger  points. All the black X's are the trigger point. There's our black X there. Black X is way  down here. And then the red dots are where the referred pain is occurring. So black X's,  trigger point, red dots, pain. Now you'll notice that you see little dots and then you see real  dark areas. The way that these charts were made was they got people in and they injected  them with hypertonic saline and then asked them to point where it hurt, kind of like put a  mark. And when they did this on multiple people, they started getting a collection of, okay,  when we have somebody and we inject them with the hypertonic saline right here in the  masseter, they really point to their teeth here. They point to their cheekbone here. And  then one person pointed right there with the pin or whatever.  [0:15:20]  09 /01/25   Page   of 5   14

SSC 2.0 - 314: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 1  So wherever you see the solid red, that means that a vast majority of people when they  did this, that is where it hurt. Now the little dots mean that it hurt someone there. So you  kind of see these characteristic areas, but just keep in mind that it can be a little broader  than the chart's going to show. It may not be exactly that spot for somebody, but this is go -  ing to get you in the general area. Note that the masseter is posterior teeth. So there aren't  any anterior teeth involved with the masseter. And it's upper and lower. The upper teeth  typically affected by upper trigger points in the upper masseter and the lower teeth with the  lower masseter. Or maybe said another way, the more towards the zygomatic arch part of  the masseter is going to be more towards the zygomatic arch with the maxilla and the  more towards the angle of the mandible is going to be down on the mandible.  [0:16:24]  So just kind of where you are. When you're trying to find these, you're going to palpate  very slowly. You're going to find a spot. They're going to be like, oh, that hurts right there.  And then you hold it and you say, okay, does that only hurt where my finger is or does that  go somewhere else? Don't lead the witness. Don't say, does that hurt where my finger is  and go into your tooth? Say, does that hurt where my finger is and does it go anywhere  else? Do you feel that anywhere else? And then that's when they will often say, yeah, I  swear that's in my lower tooth.  [0:16:54]  Why this is so important to you as a dentist is if you are a real dentist, then you for sure will  see patients with this from time to time and they will swear to you that it's their tooth, that's  where they're coming to see you actually, and they may want a root canal, they may want  their tooth extracted, I'll tell you a story about that at the end, but make sure that your di -  agnosis is clear before you do something irreversible. With the masseter, again, we have  these different trigger point areas, superficial masseter, which is what we think of when we  think about the masseter, and then the deep masseter. Deep masseter is, as the name  implies, deep, it's going to be more a straight up and down muscle, and note how the vast  majority of the referred pain there is right in the ear. So it's kind of going right into the ear.  If I had someone that points right into their ear, not the jaw joint, but into their ear, I would  think, okay, deep masseter, palpate in there, see if you can get that, elicit that pain. And  remember on this picture here, the upper X's, upper teeth, the lower X's, lower teeth.  Temporalis Muscle   [0:18:01]  Moving on to the temporalis muscle, temporalis is mostly the upper teeth. Well, I shouldn't  say mostly, it's typically only the upper teeth, and you note here that we go all the way to  the midline and all the way to the back, and kind of logical progression here, their anterior  temporalis is anterior teeth, middle is more the middle teeth, if you will, and then more as  we get to the posterior temporalis, then we get our posterior teeth. And when we get really,  really posterior on the temporalis, it's not the teeth anymore, it's just kind of in that area of  09 /01/25   Page   of 6   14

SSC 2.0 - 314: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 1  the fibers of the posterior temporalis. So temporalis, in a nutshell, maxillary teeth, so if they  are pointing to, it hurts in my maxillary teeth, I would typically start with the temporalis, but  if they said it's a front maxillary tooth, then it's almost for sure the temporalis. If it's a poste -  rior upper tooth, then start with the temporalis, because that's more likely, and then if it's  like, nope, I don't find anything there, then I would go to the masseter, again, towards the  zygomatic arch, towards the insertion of the masseter, rather than way down deep here.  [0:19:19]  A couple others that are in the head and neck area, so we have the posterior digastric, that  one, it tends to kind of stay in the general area of the posterior digastric muscle. We have  our anterior digastric, now that's kind of a crazy one, because note that the red dots are up  on the teeth, and even kind of crosses the midline here, which that's rare for muscles to do  that, it's rare for pain in the head and neck in general to cross the midline. It's rare for that  to happen. The ones that do is anterior digastric and the sternocleidomastoid, as you see  on the next picture here. With the anterior digastric, you're going to palpate up under their  chin, and this would be someone that says it's in their teeth.  [0:20:03]  Now, I had a personal experience with this with my sister-in-law, my brother's wife, and  she described her lower teeth as being itchy. Okay, that's a weird way to describe your  teeth, right? So teeth have basically binary feelings. No feeling, or normal, which is no feel -  ing, and hurt, and that's pretty much it. So even when you do a cold test or something like  that, your tooth doesn't feel cold, it feels pain. So we have no pain, which is the normal  state of the feeling in our teeth, and pain. So to describe it as my teeth feel itchy, whenever  you hear someone say something really weird like that, probably not their tooth. Okay, you  know what people say when their teeth hurt, and itchy is typically not one of them. So  anyway, knew this, palpated, found the spot, used actually an acupuncture needle to go in  and treat that muscle, and that was it. I never remember her saying anything about it  again, so got lucky on that one. Sternocleidomastoid is the one that will go across the mid -  line, across the forehead. So watch for this. This is relatively rare actually, but if you had  somebody and they say, yeah, it kind of hurts in my forehead and goes across my fore -  head, they will oftentimes literally just paint you the drawing. I always love it when that  happens because I will get out Travell & Simons book and show them the picture of what  they just described.  [0:21:33]  Now this is appropriate for you and your team members because lots of dental profession -  als have this right here. So we have a trigger point in the trapezius muscle, that can go up  the side of their head, give a headache, and then in this figure 5.2, we've got trapezius,  suboccipital muscles, sternocleidomastoid giving this presentation of quote migraine or  tension type headache, and probably you or one of your team members that's clinical  would have this, and that's because of the head posture that we often have as dental pro -  fessionals. So watch for this. If they do have this, they may go on a regular basis to get  massage therapy or physical therapy. That can be very helpful. Trigger points can be really  good for this, but really getting to the why do I have this is the important factor there.  09 /01/25   Page   of 7   14

SSC 2.0 - 314: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 1  Myofascial Pain Dysfunction   [ 0:22:25]  All right, so we now think that we've got somebody with myofascial pain dysfunction with  trigger points. What are we going to do about it? So part of our treatment, as well as part  of our diagnosis, is ethyl chloride. So ethyl chloride or fluoromethane, we're going to do  that spray and stretch over the muscle. So we spray that, we try to stretch it depending on  where it is, like in the suboccipital muscles, you'd have them put their chin to their chest  and stretch that out. Masseter, we'd have them open wide, close, open wide, temporalis,  open wide, close. Sternocleidomastoid, you might have them kind of raise their head, turn  their neck to the side. We're going to spray it and stretch it. And that is therapeutic and  also diagnostic, because if it feels better, and particularly if that referred pain seems to go  away, like you do spray and stretch of the temporalis, and they say, yeah, that makes that  tooth not hurt as much. Okay, great. Ice and moist heat therapy can be helpful. Trigger  point injections, we'll talk more about in a minute. Acupuncture or so-called dry needling.  Physical therapy, which could be manual therapy or massage. Botulism toxin injections,  yes, but maybe not for why you think. Muscle relaxants, just the other day, a Spencer  Study Club member was saying, oh yeah, I treated this person and whatever, and I put  them on muscle relaxants. Okay, muscle relaxants don't relax muscles.  [0:23:51]  Muscle relaxants are just depressants. So it'd be the same as just be like, hey, just drink a  bunch of alcohol, and it would have the same effect. So just because they're called muscle  relaxants doesn't mean they actually do anything to, quote, relax the muscle, whatever  even that means. Remember, what do muscles do? They contract and they don't contract.  So a relaxed muscle is a non-contracted muscle. What does a medicine do to make that  happen? Well, the only thing a medicine would do to make that happen would be just to  sedate you, basically. So they're just sedatives. We, in our practices, never, maybe never  is too strong of a word, we almost never put people on medications that are so-called  muscle relaxants. Some of that has to do with our looking a lot at airway and sleep, be -  cause similarly that you wouldn't tell most of your patients, hey, go ahead and drink three  or four shots of scotch right before bed, because you'd be like, hey, that's probably going  to affect their airway and make their airway more collapsible. Yeah, you'd be right.  [0:25:01]  So sedatives are usually not our jam, and we virtually never put people on these medica -  tions. Early in my career, I did. Earlier on in my career, I would put people on Valium fairly  routinely and Skelaxin and other medications like that, because some of my mentors did.  But pretty quick on, I learned that I didn't like using medications like that, because people  would get habituate, well, not habituated to them, they would get kind of addicted to them.  They would really like the effects of those medications, and I knew that it wasn't getting to  the etiology. Their etiology wasn't a muscle relaxant deficiency. Same thing with botulism  09 /01/25   Page   of 8   14

SSC 2.0 - 314: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 1  toxins. So the same thing with Botox. They don't have a Botox deficiency. And I don't like  using things like that, because it's really masking what's going on underneath. Splint ther -  apy can be helpful, but maybe not for the reason you think. Splint therapy would be helpful  for the reason that we believe. Splint therapy is helpful, particularly for a day splint. What  would that be? Because it helps people move towards 1% occlusion. A day splint is a  biofeedback device helping the patient to realize, oh, lips together, teeth apart. So that's  where the splint therapy could come in for myofascial trigger points in the temporalis or the  masseter.   Not that doing something with the splint is going to change how those muscles  work, like some people think, but more the, hey, maybe I shouldn't have my teeth together.  This is a reminder. And then PRF question mark. We'll cover that more in a minute.  [0:26:39]  I mentioned acupuncture, and interesting to me, so I actually got my license, my acu -  puncture license years ago. There was a physiatrist, a physical medicine doctor in Boise,  and he was using acupuncture for pain and some TMJ problems. And he's like, hey, Jami -  son, you should learn how to do this. And so there was a course, I think the course still ex -  ists, it's called Medical Acupuncture for Physicians. Their definition of physicians was med -  ical doctors, doctors of osteopathy, dentists, and podiatrists. I was the only dentist in my  class. There was one of the faculty members who was a dentist, but everyone else in the  course were MDs and DOs. And I found that there are certain acupuncture points, like this  one right here, gallbladder 21, and that is in this area. And in acupuncture, Chinese medi -  cine, these are called Ashi points. So an Ashi point is where you palpate until the person is  kind of like, ah, shi!  [0:27:51]  Is that funny? I always think that's funny. So the person kind of gets a reaction. So I don't  know if Ashi means something like that, but an Ashi point is that you palpate and it's when  the person is like, ouch, that hurts, an ouch point, right? That's what we'd call it in English.  And there's multiple of these points like that that are considered big acupuncture points.  So gallbladder 21 is a big one and it's an Ashi point. So there are multiple of these Ashi  points. You see some of these other areas here, so stomach six, that's right where that  black X was on the trigger point for the masseter. That stomach seven right there is kind of  that higher trigger point. The GV 15 and 16, these suboccipital muscles. There's a lot of  these acupuncture points that when you start overlapping these with some of the things  we do with trigger points and things like that, you're like, huh, there seems to be a lot cor -  related here. A lot of things going on within these disciplines using the exact same points.  Treatment (Continued)   [0:28:56]  Treatment continued, physical therapy with a home program. So not good enough, and  actually it's one of the reasons I love physical therapists versus massage therapists. I'm  painting with a broad brush here. Massage therapists don't tend to give you a home pro -  09 /01/25   Page   of 9   14

SSC 2.0 - 314: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 1  gram. Maybe if you went to the same massage therapist over and over and over again,  they would. But a typical on a cruise ship or at a spa at a resort, they're just making you  feel better and then you're out of there.  [0:29:27]  Physical therapists, on the other hand, are not, that's not their normal routine. So they're  going to try to get to the bottom of why do you hurt and then try to teach you various exer -  cises and things like that. Like I remember having a physical therapist that I worked with  and he came, we would speak together to dentists and I would teach him about TMJ prob -  lems and he would say what he did. And then he would also say, hey, for you dentists, one  of the things you can do is after you've seen a patient kind of get up, stretch like this, get  on your doorway there and get a big stretch there and your back and kind of open up your  chest.   We need to kind of bring all this back because you've been here, so we need to re -  verse that by doing this. And he would teach all the dentists that and give them kind of a  home program. So I think that's really important. Stress management biofeedback, if kind  of these tightness of the muscles is what's leading to this. And guess what? Improve sleep.  Of course, that's what you're looking at, right? So if you have somebody that seems to be  prone to myofascial trigger points, ask them the sleep questions. There is no disease that  I've ever come across that a treatment for it is get a crappy night's sleep. If you ignore their  sleep, then that's ignoring part of their etiology and they are way less likely to get better.  Indications for Trigger Point Injections   [0:30:48]  Okay, let's get into our indications for trigger point injections. So trigger points that are un -  responsive manual therapy. So do you need to jump straight to injections? Absolutely not.  You can send some of the good physical therapists. By the way, physical therapy covered  by insurance. So if you're like, hey, I think I'm just going to send a physical therapy. Awe -  some. We don't do trigger point injections on everybody who has a muscular trigger point.  We will do them a lot, but we absolutely will get physical therapists engaged. Oftentimes,  because covered by insurance, the physical therapist is going to see that patient two or  three times a week, whereas more difficult for us to do that. So if, on the other hand, they  go there and they're just not responding to manual therapy, then an injection could be indi -  cated. Skilled manual therapy is not available. You don't have a great physical therapist or  massage therapist in your area. Limited time. Person doesn't have time to be going to the  physical therapist or massage therapist on a regular basis. Hyperuricemia or symptoms of  gout. Now, this is a contraindication for massage. So that's just the general contraindica -  tion. But you could still do a trigger point injection. Muscle cannot be stretched or shouldn't  be stretched. So this is somebody that is hypermobile and stretching the muscle. They  don't really stretch because they're hypermobile. That could be an indication for injections  instead of the muscular physical therapy or massage therapy.  09 /01/25   Page   of 10   14

SSC 2.0 - 314: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 1  What to Inject?   [ 0:32:17]  All right. Now, what to inject? Now, this can be kind of confusing, so make sure you track  with me here. It's not about what you inject. It's about how you inject. Say that again. It's  not about what you inject. It's how you inject. Now, let me read this quote from Dr. Travell  word for word. I normally don't do that for you on the slides, but I'm going to in this case.  ‘Dry needling, which means not injecting anything. ’ Now, pause here. This term has been  adopted by physical therapists. You may have heard that term before from a physical ther -  apist. They use the term dry needling. Why do they use the term dry needling? So they  use an acupuncture needle and they dry needle. That gets them from being in trouble with  the acupuncture board because they're not doing acupuncture. It gets them from getting in  trouble with the medical board because they're not injecting. They're dry needling. So this  is where this term comes from is dry needling, but the physical therapist actually adopted  that using acupuncture needles for those reasons.  [0:33:31]  Going back to my story from a moment ago, the reason I got licensed in acupuncture is I  thought I had to. I went through this course. Medical doctors, they can do pretty much any -  thing they want, but there's a board of acupuncture in Idaho, and so I contacted them and  said, hey, I'm a dentist. Can I do acupuncture as a dentist? And they said, no, you need to  be licensed in acupuncture. I was like, okay, how do I do that? They're like, well, as a den -  tist or a chiropractor, we have a way that you can get licensed, and that is you take a 300-  hour course, and then you take our little test, and then we give you a license. I'm like, all  right. And that's the reason I took the medical acupuncture for physicians course, which  just so happened to be 300 hours, and these laws were set up, this course was set up to  kind of support, give people support in order to get their license if they were one of these  other things. They didn't let chiropractors in that course, but they did let dentists. So I go  through all that, and I get my license, and I'm using acupuncture needles, but just for TMJ  problems, right? I'm not treating all sorts of problems throughout the whole body with the  acupuncture. I learned all that stuff, but I wasn't using it except for my family members. I  would use that for my family members, but not my patients.  [0:34:44]  If somebody needed things like that, I would send them to an acupuncturist, right? That's  what they do. And then one year, my birthday fell on a weekend, and the way this board  worked is the license was on your birthday. So the license would expire on your birthday,  and I forgot to re-up my license. My birthday was on a weekend, so by the time I realized  this mistake that I'd made, it was too late. So I contact them the following Monday after my  birthday, so it's like, you know, August 31st or something like that. My birthday is the 29th,  and I'm like, hey, oops, my bad. Can I reinstate my license? Thinking that there'd be some  grace period or something like that, and they're like, well, sure, but you're going to pay a  fee. You're going to pay a penalty for letting it lapse, and I was like, oh, all right, and that  09 /01/25   Page   of 11   14

SSC 2.0 - 314: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 1  kind of ticked me off a little bit. I'm like, well, curious, how long do I have to re-up my li -  cense by paying this penalty? And they're like, oh, there's no time limit. You just, when you  want to reinstate your license, you'll just pay this fee, and then you'll be reinstated.  [0:35:57]  I'm like, all right, so I had had that license for maybe at least three years, and this was the  little nudge I needed. It didn't cost that much to re-up my license, but I just thought, you  know what? I don't think I need a license. And so I made an appointment to go to the  Board of Dentistry the next time they met, and I took a bunch of literature, and I went there  to make a case for why I should be able to do acupuncture as a dentist for TMJ problems.  And I went, and I shared the literature with them, made a little packet, and gave it to them,  and kind of gave them a little bit of a talk. And then at the end of this, one of the board  members says, Dr. Spencer, who told you you couldn't do acupuncture for TMJ problems,  or that you couldn't do acupuncture? Who told you that? Who told you you couldn't do  that? And I'm like, the Board of Acupuncture.  [0:36:48]  They're like, well, you're a dentist. It's our board that says if you do that or not, and there's  no reason you can't do that as a dentist. You're using it for TMJ problems, which is within  your scope of practice, so why not? And I'm like, oh, okay. So that was it. They didn't, like,  rewrite the law or anything like that. You will not see the word acupuncture in the Idaho  Dental Practice Act, but they just told me, yeah, you don't need to have a special license in  order to do this. You're not practicing acupuncture. You're practicing dentistry. So fast for -  ward, my nephew, Dr. Kuehne, who runs our Boise practice, and our partner, Kevin Man -  gelson, runs our Salt Lake practice. They use acupuncture needles to do these tech -  niques, and they've never taken the courses. I just taught them how to do it, and it's within  their scope of practice as a dentist. Okay, so there you go.  Dry Needling   [0:37:45]  Back to this here, dry needling. That's a big story on dry needling. “Dry needling is as ef -  fective as injection of an anesthetic for relief of trigger point symptoms IF, the big if there is  added by me, if the needle elicits a local twitch response (LTR), which occurs when the  needle encounters active loci of the trigger point”. Okay, let me read that again. Dry  needling is as effective as injection of an anesthetic for relief of trigger point symptoms. In  other words, injecting nothing is as effective as injecting anesthetic if the needle elicits a  local twitch response, which occurs when the needle encounters the loci of the trigger  point.  [0:38:33]  Continuing, “Conversely, if no local twitch response occurs, dry needling and injection of  non-toxic anesthetics are equally ineffective”. If you don't get the local twitch response, it's  ineffective. What if I inject Botox? If you don't get the local twitch response, it's ineffective.  09 /01/25   Page   of 12   14

SSC 2.0 - 314: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 1  What if I inject Marcaine? If you don't get the local twitch response, it's ineffective. What if I  am going in with my needle and I get a local twitch response and I haven't even injected  anything yet? Then you've already won. And if you want to inject the anesthetic, it's for this  reason. Continuing on the quote there, “Post-injection soreness is more likely to occur, is  more severe, and is of longer duration following dry needling”. Now to clarify here, that is  dry needling with a hypodermic needle. So hypodermic needles are hollow, as you know,  and so you're doing a lot of trauma. When you're taking a hypodermic needle, a hollow  needle in there, you're going trauma, trauma, trauma, trauma, whereas a acupuncture  needle that is obviously not hollow causes way less trauma.  [0:39:44]  So in my experience, and I've had dry needling just a week or two ago, I went to the physi -  cal therapist that we refer to, and she treats me and my family members as well, had some  pain here in my arm. It's mostly gone now. She did one treatment, and it's 98% gone, and  hoping that that just goes away completely. But she did dry needling, not just here locally,  but up in my neck, and I had no soreness from the dry needling. So dry needling, post dry  needling soreness, is associated with hypodermic needles, not acupuncture needles. So if  you use acupuncture needles, that's going to be just as effective as using a hypodermic  needle if, what, you get the local twitch response. If you don't get the local twitch response,  may not have done anything.  [0:40:35]  Now, we will talk in another lesson about diagnostic injections, and so you can give a di -  agnostic injection with local anesthetic, but there you're not necessarily, your thought  process isn't that I'm doing a therapeutic injection. Your thought process is I'm trying to fig -  ure out where the pain is. That's a diagnostic injection. Now, when we're treating the trig -  ger point, we already have our diagnosis. Our diagnosis is myofascial trigger point, so  when we're sticking that needle in, we're not thinking about making the pain go away.  We're thinking about treating the underlying etiology of the pain, which is the trigger point.  Does that make sense? So bottom line is learn... I would strongly encourage you to learn  to do this with acupuncture needles, and then you don't have to worry about what to inject.  But it's not about what we inject, okay? It's about the hitting the trigger point.  With Anesthetic   [0:41:28]  So with anesthetic, if we want to use anesthetic because we want to use a hypodermic  needle, it just feels more comfortable to you, then use something short-acting without epi.  Notice that in Dr. Travell's quote there, she said injecting non-toxic substances. So anes -  thetics are going to be myotoxic. They're going to be not great for the muscle in general.  So the less myotoxic is no epinephrine, and actually lidocaine, xylocaine is the best. It just  doesn't come in carpules. So if you're going to use a dental syringe, you're probably not  going to use something that's in a medical. You've got to get a medical thing and draw it  09 /01/25   Page   of 13   14

SSC 2.0 - 314: Myofascial Trigger Points Part 1  up. You'd have to use a medical syringe to do that. So for ease, and actually for trigger  points, we typically use a dental syringe.  [0:42:20]  It just kind of feels better in the hand for stuff like this. I like to be able to kind of draw up,  make sure that I'm not in a blood vessel. You're almost virtually never are, but it doesn't  hurt to be able to aspirate like we're used to. Typically, obviously medical doctors, they're  supposed to aspirate, but it requires kind of pulling back on the plunger and stuff, and  that's a little harder for them to do. So this is what we typically use. So either Polocaine or  Carbocaine, the Mepivicaine, Carbocaine, that's what we typically use is the different  name brands there.  [outro music]  09 /01/25   Page   of 14   14

