SSC 2.0 - 312: TMJ Injections Part 2  SSC 2.0   Level 3  312: TMJ Injections Part 2  [intro music]  Ultrasound Guided TMJ Injections   [0:00:12]  All right. So I mentioned ultrasound guided TMJ injections, and this is something that we  teach in our courses. I think it's pretty cool. We're not actively as I record this, we're not  doing this in our practices yet. I imagine by the time you actually watch this recording that  we will be in 2025 in our Spencer Study Club live event we're talking about the ultrasound  guided TMJ injections. Our business lead members have already had some exposure to  this and it's pretty cool. The main reason that it would be not adopted in offices like mine,  for example, is because we've done it so much. Whenever you have somebody that's  done stuff a lot, it's hard to get them to do something different. For example, I'm aware that  many, many oral surgeons nowadays still place implants without guides. And that's be -  cause they've placed lots of implants. And so they will free hand it and they feel that that's  just as accurate or in their mind, perhaps even better than using a guide. But for most of  us, it'd be nice to use that guide. Ultrasound is a challenge to learn what you're looking at,  but then once you learn what you're looking at, then it can guide you into these little spa -  ces here.  [0:01:43]  As you see on the pictures, you see the orientation, by the way, of the ultrasound. On A  and B, it's oriented that way and then it's turned 90 degrees for C and D. So depending on  the orientation of the head of the ultrasound unit will be what you're looking at. So here we  have the condyle and then this line here is our needle. That's A and B. And so you see the  condyle, you see a space above the condyle, you see the glenoid fossa, and this is what  it's looking at. C, and they don't have a picture here of what C and D looks like, but they  just show that with the orientation this way, you're going to get a very different view. Again,  we teach this at Spencer Study Club to help you with this. And again, I'm very pro doing  ultrasound guided TMJ injections and I'll show you why I'm really pro this in just a second.  I think also for you, if you are more of a beginner, you want to know, you want to know  where that needle is. And again, like I shared with you, that email today of somebody, and  she's actually from a different country and going through, yeah, I did this, I did this, I did  this, and I'm just not sure and what do you think? It's kind of like, well, their bite wasn't off  and this wasn't the way I said it would be and whatever. Make sure you go through those  videos, make sure you understand it. But even then, if you give an injection, you're using  your knowledge of anatomy to help you understand where the needle is based on what  09 /01/25   Page   of 1   11

SSC 2.0 - 312: TMJ Injections Part 2  happened with the anesthesia. But you're still not positive. You can be pretty good with  where it is.  [0:03:31]  Actually, kind of fun story on this, when we were doing an initial course with ultrasound  guided injection of the jaw joint, I volunteered to be the test subject and we had a doctor  there who's very knowledgeable with ultrasound using me. And kind of use the ultrasound  on my jaw joint, had it up on a big screen TV so everybody could see what was going on.  And then one of my colleagues, one of our business lead members injected my jaw joint  and he had an anesthetic in the syringe and it kind of goes in and everyone's watching and  they can see the needle and see where it's going and stuff like that. And then he does that  and I'm like, okay, my bite's off. So I knew he was in the capsule, but he also went too  deep and he did that reverse Gow-gates thing. So my lip got numb as well. So he got both.  He was in the capsule and then he actually went too far and went too medial, too deep  and that got into my inferrabellar nerve. So I had an inferrabellar nerve block from the out -  side.  [0:04:40]  So knowing the anatomy using ultrasound is not an excuse for not knowing your anatomy  or it's not a replacement for knowing your anatomy. He had to know both because the ul -  trasound and it's... And these are the images that you get. So it's not like high def full color.  Clearly, this is what I'm looking at and every time you move the ultrasound, it's given you  because this is sonar, right? So it's like sending signals and bouncing back and it's giving  you a little bit different images. If you've had this done for a baby, you know that every  movement or whatever kind of gives a different image. Same thing with this. You got to get  good at this. It's going to take some practice, but after doing so, it's going to increase your  accuracy and then you're still going to use your anatomy. Okay, I did that. I'm pretty sure  I'm in the joint. Okay, I'm injecting. Hey patient, does your bite feel weird? “Nope”. Okay,  that's strange. Five minutes later, it's like, “hey, I can't blink on the right side”. Oh, I think I  was superficial. Okay, or hey, is your bite feel weird? “No. My lip though. My lip feeling  numb”. Okay. Hey, I was too deep. Understand the anatomy, let ultrasound guide you (hey,  pun intended) into the jaw joint, but then make sure you understand your anatomy, that's  going to help you know if you were there or not.  Ultrasound-Guided Versus Blind Technique   [0:06:04]  So this is an article on using ultrasound guided injections versus blind technique, which is  like what we all do right now. This was on cadavers. So they took people that were pretty  expert on TMJ injections, and they had cadavers, and then it's like, okay, go for it, get into  the joint on a cadaver, and then we're going to do it blind versus ultrasound. And reading  the paragraph right here, TMJ injections using the blind technique or the ultrasound guided  technique were performed in 10 non-embalmed cadavers. So that's a fresh dissection that  09 /01/25   Page   of 2   11

SSC 2.0 - 312: TMJ Injections Part 2  has the same feel and everything as normal tissue, almost, so it'd be slightly different, but  not embalmed. So embalmed from your cadaver days is super stiff and whatnot, that  would give a very different feel. So a non-fixed specimen is going to be far more like just a  normal injection. All right. So that's the folks we got here. So they did the shots, ultrasound  and then blind. After dissection, the accuracy of the TMJ injections was found to be signifi -  cantly greater for the ultrasound guided injections than for the blind technique. Blind 55%  versus ultrasound 95%. Okay, now that's on 10 cadavers. Now that sounds pretty awful  that they were basically 50% of the time in the joint versus almost 100% of the time in the  joint with ultrasound.  [0:07:44]  But let's go ahead and read further here. For injections into the upper joint space of the  TMJ, and remember that's going to be disc is in place and we can kind of use that opening  technique to open up that upper joint space, the success rate of injection was comparable  for the two techniques, blind 80% versus ultrasound 100%. So said a different way, if you  do the technique that I just told you to do, 80% of the time you should be in there. Now,  would we like to be 100%? Sure, we're surgeons. We like to be 100% every time that we  can be, right? We want to be in there. We don't want to not be in there. But don't read this  study as like, oh yeah, you know, because I've heard people do this by the way, they're  like, oh yeah, a blind joint injection, it's only 50% of the time are you in the joint. It depends  on where you're trying to be. So 80% of the time into the posterior, the upper, that posterior  approach into the upper joint space and don't get too confused on that. Remember, upper  joint space is the disc above the disc part, which is going to open up when you have them  open like that.  [0:08:54]  Okay. However, ultrasound guided injections into the lower space had a much higher suc -  cess rate than the blind technique. Blind 30%, ultrasound 90%. So there you go. If we  want to be in the lower joint space, that one, as I mentioned, even when you think you're  touching the condyle, unless they're moving their jaw and you know you're on the condyle,  you may not be. And even then there's possibility that you've caught it way low and you've  hit the neck of the condyle. So you're technically in the capsule, but you're way low on it.  This is why I am encouraging everyone to start using ultrasound guided injections, particu -  larly for patients with, they don't have breakdown yet, but we're trying to avoid breakdown  of the condyle. We believe that they have a separation of superior joint space and inferior  joint space. If there's no separation, then who cares? So as in the disc is gone, it's  thrashed, it's just bone on bone type of situation. And there is no superior and inferior joint  space anymore. It's just the joint space. But if we believe that they have an inferior joint  space because they still have a disc and we'd like to have that good stuff of PRF in there  affecting the condyle, the actual surface of the condyle, then by all means, we should be in  the inferior joint space. And just a summary here from the authors that once again, doing  the blind technique was just less accurate than the ultrasound guided technique, particu -  larly with the inferior joint space.  09 /01/25   Page   of 3   11

SSC 2.0 - 312: TMJ Injections Part 2  Auricotemporal Nerve Block   [0:10:29]  Let's talk now about anesthesia of the auriculotemporal nerve. Now, why would you want  to do an auriculotemporal nerve block and what's the difference between auriculotemporal  nerve block and a joint injection? So a joint injection, when I say joint injection anyway, I  mean into the joint, into the joint capsule as we've just described. An auriculotemporal  nerve block is actually a block of the auriculotemporal nerve not going into the capsule. If  we go into the capsule, then we're going to catch branches of the auriculotemporal nerve  because that's what goes into the capsule. But our goal is really to get that anesthetic into  the capsule, have it swishing around in there, have an effect in the entire joint capsule.  With an auriculotemporal nerve block, our goal is to anesthetize the joint, at least partially.  As I mentioned before, 75% is from the auriculotemporal nerve. The other 25% is from the  masseteric nerve and the deep temporal nerve. So we're going to get a good portion with  the auriculotemporal nerve. The goal of an auriculotemporal nerve block is to anesthetize  the joint without putting anesthetic into the capsule itself. So why would we want to do  this? Well, it'd be helpful when we want to anesthetize the joint and not change the bite.  [0:11:48]  So for example, you have a splint to deliver, and the patient's in pain, and you want to give  them some pain relief. You think that's going to be helpful for them, but you don't want to  change their occlusion, whereas if you put fluid into the jaw joint, then it would be off. Now  another way you could do that is to fit the splint first and then give the injection, but this is  just a nice technique for you to have when you're thinking, you know, I want to give this  pain relief, but I don't want to change the occlusion. I don't want to put anything in the fos -  sa itself.  Step-by-Step Procedure   [0:12:23]  Okay, so here's how we do it. Palpate the posterior surface of the mandibular condyle.  You're going to do that similar to with a intraarticular injection, but you're going to go lower.  So the injection site is going to be 10 to 13 millimeters down, and then obviously on the  back of the condyle there. We're going to prepare the skin with the Betadine or alcohol.  You could do the exact technique that I talked about before. You could go whole hog and  do a complete sterile technique if you wanted to.   No problem with that at all. You could  spray the skin with the ethyl chloride the same way. Insert the needle directly to the point  estimated to be the area of the auriculotemporal nerve. Remember, the auriculotemporal  nerve is wrapping around the condyle from the medial. So the inferior alveolar nerve is  heading down into the mandibular canal. The auriculotemporal nerve has come off the  mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve, and it's going to wrap around the condyle and  then go whoop the side of your head. So kind of picture that in your mind's eye. We're go -  09 /01/25   Page   of 4   11

SSC 2.0 - 312: TMJ Injections Part 2  ing to contact the neck of the condyle probably. It's not particularly necessary, but it's nice  to know that you're there. You're not going to have the temporal bone in your way this time,  so the only thing down here is going to be the condyle if you're down in the right spot, if  you're starting in the right spot. That's the only thing that's going to be in your way, so to  speak. So to be on that neck of the condyle, and you could also be a little medial. You  could swing a little bit onto the medial side. On the facial, the lateral side, that would not be  ideal because, remember, it's wrapping around, and you might miss it if you're too far lat -  eral.  Aspirate & Deposit the Solution   [0:13:52]  Aspirate, deposit the solution. What should get numb there? The condyle and the side of  their head. Now that's different. If you do a capsular injection, if you're intraarticular, if  you're in the joint capsule, the side of their head doesn't get numb because you didn't  anesthetize the auriculotemporal nerve. So in an auriculotemporal nerve block, the hall -  mark that you actually block the auriculotemporal nerve will be joint will be numb, but so  will all of this up the side of their head, the auricular and temporal areas. The back of their  ear and up the side of their head is all going to be numb. So here is our approximate loca -  tion. So the dark part there being the ear opening, and then we're down here. Again, if you  have them open a little bit, it is going to kind of maybe help you feel where that condyle is,  but that's our goal. Here's our mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve. There's our pos -  terior deep temporal and the masseteric that are coming into the condyle too, and then all  of those branches from the auriculotemporal nerve. Another just picture there of auricu -  lotemporal nerve right there. You can see that in the orientation to the ear opening and the  neck of the condyle. We're just down that neck a little ways.  Prolotherapy   [0:15:13]  Next, let's talk about prolotherapy, and I'm going to do this more in a historical context, and  I was thinking about taking it out completely, but I bet that there may be some people in  the world that for various reasons, laws or whatever, where you live, maybe you can't do  PRF. Maybe they've decided that's only for medical doctors or something like that. So I  thought, you know what? I'll keep this in here. Prolotherapy is good. It is better than just  local anesthesia or dry needling or things like that, but far inferior to PRF. And what I  found, so we stopped doing prolotherapy after a few years because it just didn't really help  that many people, and the only people that I found that it helped were really young people.  And that's because they had a really robust immune system that helped them respond to  the prolotherapy with a healing cascade.  [0:16:14]  09 /01/25   Page   of 5   11

SSC 2.0 - 312: TMJ Injections Part 2  So let me go through this quickly. I don't think this is, frankly, something that you're going  to do if you have access to PRF. The idea behind prolotherapy, though, is that we're inject -  ing something to stimulate the body's natural healing cascade, the healing process, and  we're typically going to do this with a hyperdextrose solution that's going to cause the body  to react to that in this hopefully positive way. Again, as we go through this, you'll be like,  well, yeah, PRF's going to be a lot better. But again, let's just go through this quickly. So  there's a couple different theories on how this works. One is the positive inflammation the -  ory. I'll let you read this whole thing. This is Ross Hauser, who wrote a whole bunch of  books of Prolo Your Pain Away. And the idea here is that it is creating a local inflammation.  Your body is going to go in and heal that wound and cause that improvement. Here's a lit -  tle more information about that positive inflammation theory with prolotherapy.  [0:17:14]  Then there is another theory, and that is growth factor stimulation theory. So in this theory,  the idea is that it's not that you're causing trauma per se, or that you're causing this nega -  tive thing to create a positive thing. It's that you putting in the sugar water is causing a re -  lease of growth factors, and that is the reason for the healing. So this is a Dr. Dean  Reeves. He's a medical doctor, and he does a lot of this. And interesting, when I was  learning about prolotherapy years and years ago, this is probably at least 15, maybe 20  years ago, and there were the different schools of thought there. So one school of thought  with prolotherapy is this positive inflammation theory. So it was critical that the patient  couldn't take Advil and stuff like that after the procedure, whereas Dr. Reeves was doing  steroid injections and prolotherapy at the same time. He would treat people's back prob -  lems and stuff like that and be like, steroid, steroid, steroid, and then he would inject the  dextrose solution prolotherapy. And in his mind, those had kind of nothing to do with each  other. He was going to turn down the inflammation because he was stimulating growth fac -  tors. So which one is the correct one? I'm not sure, but there are these different theories  on how that might work.  [0:18:37]  Then there's a little different kind of threw this in just so you would hear this term. So vis -  cosupplementation, and this is like putting something in the joint to help it be more smooth  and have more fluid in the joint, things like that. So that's stuff like hyaluronic acid. And  you'll read in the literature and in our library of PRP and PRF and stuff like that. Some -  times you'll see PRP compared to hyaluronic acid, for example. So that's why I throw this  in. So those are used too. I've never done hyaluronic acid injections, nothing wrong with  hyaluronic acid, but now, again, we would be using PRF in these cases instead of things  like hyaluronic acid.  Prolotherapy Injections (We Don’t Do This Anymore)   [0:19:19]  09 /01/25   Page   of 6   11

SSC 2.0 - 312: TMJ Injections Part 2  Prolotherapy could be done in any of the injections that we've talked about with injections  outside the deep, dark hole. It's the same thought process that you're going to use for  PRF. It's just not using PRF. So again, we don't do this anymore. We would only do PRF,  and as a family member, I'm for sure using PRF instead of prolotherapy.  Indications   [0:19:43]  So indications, anytime you feel that there may have been a sprain or strain of ligament,  tendon, or muscle, attempt to tighten loose TMJ ligaments, treat chronic strain of muscular  attachments. So this should sound exactly like PRF. Different approaches, so Dr. Reeves  was doing them like every two months. In the Prolo Your Pain Away book, they're talking  about once a month. We used to do about every three to four weeks, which is similar actu -  ally to what we do with PRF, and that's where that's kind of come from. For the pro-in -  flammation model, they can't take the anti-inflammatories. We have them limit their full ac -  tivity, and typically they're going to get four to maybe six injections. That is also fairly typi -  cal with PRF. With PRF, we don't have them on anti-inflammatories. We do have them be  careful, and we ideally give them splint therapy for the joint for their crutches, and there's  going to be multiple injections in our practice. We typically do three.  Prolo Solutions   [0:20:43]  Here's the Prolo solutions, I'm just going to kind of blow through this, and you can pause it  if you want to make it. So here's your shopping list of what you're going to get. There's also  something called serapin. This does still exist as far as I know. It's an interesting material.  It's one of the only things in the physician's desk reference that doesn't have any side ef -  fects and so this is something you could use. It looks kind of oily. So we used to do this  with joint unlocking procedures all the time because we like the idea that it was a little  slick. Again, since we started doing PRF, we don't use serapin anymore either. This is how  to make prolotherapy in your office. Again, you can just kind of pause this slide if you need  to write that down, but if I was you, I would just do PRF nowadays.  Prolotherapy Compared to PRP   [0:21:28]  So let me end with a couple slides on prolotherapy compared to PRP in this case, and the  good news is that both of these treatments are good. So if there is a circumstance that you  can't do PRF or PRP, again, we're going to typically do PRF, right? So if you have a patient  that is super scared to get the blood drawn, now both treatments are going to involve stick -  ing a needle in somebody, so it's just one less needle, basically. You don't have to draw  09 /01/25   Page   of 7   11

SSC 2.0 - 312: TMJ Injections Part 2  the blood, but you're still going to have to put the proliferant into the patient, and that's go -  ing to require a needle. So I don't think that's kind of a good argument of like one is... I  mean, it's slightly less invasive because you don't have to do the blood draw, but still both  are invasive. Nevertheless, and you can kind of look over this study here, so it was using  prolotherapy versus PRP in plantar fasciitis. I've personally suffered with plantar fasciitis, in  one case, it basically went away with kind of normal kind of you know roller ball massage  type things and the the Strassberg sock it's called that you wear when you sleep and stuff  like that. And then the last bout that I had with it was in my other foot, and I did ultimately  go to my partner Kevin in our Salt Lake office and I'm like hey let's go ahead and inject my  foot here. And I'm happy to say that the PRF in my plantar fasciitis actually now that I think  of it, I think we did two times. The first time helped quite a bit, didn't go away completely,  go back the second time we did a different approach, hurt way less than I thought it was  going to. So the plantar fascia in the bottom of your foot and I thought okay this is gonna  super suck and it was really no big deal. But this study kind of compares the two and the  good news on it is that it says that both are great. So skipping to this last paragraph right  here, each treatment seems to be effective for chronic recalcitrant plantar fasciitis expand -  ing the treatment options for patients in whom conservative care has failed. PRP treatment  also may lead to a better initial improvement and function compared to dextrose prolother -  apy treatment. So both of these options are available to you and seem to have a good re -  sult.  [0:24:00]  Here's another example. This is down in an osteochondral lesion of the talus so kind of a  deep ankle sprain problem talked in this study about using PRP or prolotherapy. Once  again kind of looking at this these ankle joint sprains and once again we see that people  have good outcomes in both. Kind of skipping here to the bolded older patients or ad -  vanced stage sprains have poor results. Younger patients or early stage lesions have  more satisfactory results. And that is true of prolotherapy and PRP and it makes sense. If  you're going to draw out the blood of a young person and concentrate everything, there's  going to be a higher concentration of all those growth factors in the younger person's  blood. So younger people are going to do better. Now we've seen older people do super  duper well with PRF where in my experience with prolotherapy I didn't have older people  doing as well.  [0:25:00]  Maybe I wasn't that good at it or something. Maybe that's the problem. So the literature the  evidence shows that both of these treatments are good for people. So again kind of deal -  er's choice if you like the idea of just the dextrose. The advantages of the dextrose are su -  per fast. You can mix this up. It's shelf stable after you've done that recipe. It just sits there.  It's ready for you to go where obviously with PRF you're going to need your centrifuge. You  need to draw the blood. You need to do that kind of stuff. So in this study basically identi -  cal, we had 90% of patients with PRP, 90% or 88.8% of the patients in the prolotherapy  group. Good outcomes. No significant difference between the two groups. You know bot -  tom line both things are going to help. These last two statements same paper just reiterat -  09 /01/25   Page   of 8   11

SSC 2.0 - 312: TMJ Injections Part 2  ing those points. Both good treatments and then the author's making the point that, hey  maybe prolotherapy a little bit less expensive, a little bit less invasive. So there you go. But  like I said before prolo and PRF both involve a needle. So if somebody hates needles then  that's not going to be for them. There's going to be something else you can do.  [0:26:10]  But I encourage you to learn the injections. That's the point of all of this is learn the injec -  tion techniques. Be comfortable with that. And then the cool thing is something new comes  on. We're doing exosomes. We're doing stem cell stuff. All the cool things that regenerative  medicine has to offer which really prolotherapy led the way into this. Prolotherapy is based  on the foundation of we're going to harness the body's own ability to heal. Now we're just  doing it in different ways. If you understand how to do the injections, you understand the  anatomy, you understand the reason behind it, then whatever comes next that's going to  be awesome and we're going to be here for you and teaching you it. You'll be ready be -  cause the technique is going to be exactly the same, just the thought process of what  you're doing might be a little bit different.  What to Inject and Why?   [0:26:57]  Final slide here what to inject and why. What's your diagnosis? I will support your what if  you can clearly explain to me your why. I want to know your diagnosis. I want to know why  you chose that thing. So the why and the what should flow from your diagnosis. So a cou -  ple examples. Diagnostic injection, well short-acting anesthetic, right? Why would you use  Marcaine if it's for diagnostic injection? You're going to use a short-acting anesthetic for a  diagnostic injection. You probably wouldn't use PRF in a diagnostic injection because it's  not an anesthetic. So that doesn't make any sense and you're not using it to cause a heal -  ing process for you to help in your diagnosis. So diagnostic, short-acting anesthetic.  Pain Relief   [0:27:44]  Pain relief, well now we got some choices, right? So you could say, well, I'm going to use  PRF for pain relief because I believe that there's a trauma. I believe that there's an in -  flammatory process going on here. This is what I think is causing the problem and I think  PRF is going to help heal that problem versus an anesthetic and maybe a long acting  anesthetic that will provide pain relief but only temporarily obviously. Or you could make a  case for I'm going to use a long acting anesthetic because I think that's going to give the  patient immediate pain relief and I'm going to get them back tomorrow to do PRF, or I'm  going to do the long acting anesthetic right now. I'm going to let them sit in the waiting  room for 30 minutes, let that kind of flush out a little bit after it's done its effect on the  09 /01/25   Page   of 9   11

SSC 2.0 - 312: TMJ Injections Part 2  nerves, and then I'm going to put in PRF to start that healing cycle. That would all make  sense.  Tightening Ligaments   [0:28:40]  Tightening ligaments, well, we're probably down to PRF again or prolotherapy, both of  those showing great results with people. Again, in my experience, in the experience of my  partners, we're having more success with PRF than we ever did with prolotherapy. But  again, according to the literature, prolotherapy is also excellent, and I'm sure practitioners  of prolotherapy do a great job. We like doing PRF because of the results we've seen. And I  guess one other thing, is I'm not aware of any literature showing or other cases showing  like bone coming back with prolotherapy. Maybe that does occur, but from everything I was  taught with prolotherapy, it was for soft tissue, it was for enthesis problems, it was for the  tendonitis, it was for the attachments that we've talked about in these sessions here.  That's what I've heard prolotherapy used for, never like, hey, yeah, we did prolotherapy in -  jections, and look, we got the condyle to grow back, which of course we've seen.  [0:29:43]  So if your diagnosis changes along this process here, then your why and your what may  also change. We start with one diagnosis, we think it's this, we do a couple things, we see  how the patient reacts, and that may change our diagnosis, which means it would change  our treatment, and that is totally fine. So leave you with the far side here and the other joke  here. For crying out loud, I was hibernating, don't you guys ever take a pulse? That's bad  diagnosis. This other doctor here, considering the obvious lies on your information form  and my tendency to misdiagnose, we should get along just fine. Okay, hope that's not you.  Your patients are the ones that don't obviously, you know, they don't always put the right  stuff on their forms, they keep things from you that they're on certain medications and cer -  tain other issues, but you aren't going to be this doctor and misdiagnose people. You are  going to diagnose correctly, choose the right treatments, and remember, we use that word  tentative diagnosis on purpose because when you're going through things like this, a lot of  times it is a tentative diagnosis, and empirically, you're going to figure out the best treat -  ment for that patient.  [0:30:52]  Empirically meaning you're going to do something, see how they respond, learn from that,  keep on the path, change direction, do what you need to do, but that is how you do this  versus your typical dentistry of, hey, hole in the tooth, how do I fix that hole in the tooth?  This is a little bit harder with TMD and sleep apnea for that matter. There are things that  we do where we make a decision and then we look for the outcome of that decision and  that method, that treatment with the patient, and we learn from that and then we move for -  ward. Okay, so that was all about the TMJ injections. Obviously, you're going to need to  get to a course if you haven't already to learn how to do these. If you already know how,  09 /01/25   Page   of 10   11

SSC 2.0 - 312: TMJ Injections Part 2  awesome. And as I said before, if you already know how to do the injections outside the  deep, dark hole, then it doesn't really matter if you're injecting anesthetic or a drop of  steroid with an anesthetic or prolotherapy or PRF or exosome, stem cells, whatever you  want to do, it's going to be the exact same technique. You know how to do the technique,  and then we're just going to put different things in the syringes.  [0:31:59]  So as your skill set grows and as more and more things come to the forefront of regenera -  tive medicine, you're going to be ready to roll. If you don't know how to do those injections  yet, come to the next course that we're offering in this. We do these several times a year  because it's so important. They always sell out. We keep a small group so that you get lots  of experience under the watchful eye of our instructors. Make sure you get those skills be -  cause if you don't have these skills, it's really going to limit the number of people you can  help. And if you are honest with yourself and with your patients, you would actually refer  the patient to someone who can offer PRF and regenerative treatments rather than just try  to treat them with splint therapy only. I really believe that within our group anyway, not of -  fering these treatments is malpractice. I'll be very blunt with you. For the millions out there,  maybe not millions, but for the hundreds of thousands, well, probably actually millions, mil -  lions of dentists on planet Earth that are completely ignorant of these things, okay, they get  a pass. You don't anymore.  [0:33:12]  You know better. You know how to treat people. And if you don't have the skills yet to do it,  then go get them. And contact me if you're like, well, gosh, you know, how do I do this? Or  I'm in this country. I just literally, before I came in to record this little bit here, I was on an  email with one of our members from Australia. And she wanted to come to the States to do  this training because it's really no one doing it there in Australia. And I said, hey, why don't  you figure out a group, get me to come there. I'll do a course for a whole bunch of people,  a lot less expensive for me and Jenny to fly down to Australia rather than 20 people from  Australia to come to us to learn this stuff. Wherever you are, we can get you the education,  get you comfortable so that you can help people. This is super important. Hope that you  will learn it. If you already learn it, I hope that you will spread the word to your oral sur -  geons in particular. They're the ones that get dumped, all these TMJ patients. If they learn  about you doing these things to help patients with TMJ problems and the skills that you  have, in my experience, they'll stop doing surgeries, they'll just refer to you. Okay, take  care.  [outro music]  09 /01/25   Page   of 11   11

