SSC 2.0 - 322: Photobiomodulation Part 1  SSC 2.0   Level 3  322: Photobiomodulation Part 1  [intro music]  Enhancing Outcomes: Regenerative Injections & Photobiomodulation  Get to Know Dr. Rahul Desai   [0:00:17]  Dr. Rahul Desai:   Well, thank you for having me, everybody. This is the first time I think I've  ever had the pleasure, an opportunity speaking in front of a dental audience and TMJ spe -  cialists. So thank you for allowing me to take a little bit of your evening and night to talk  about regenerative medicine, my passion and my newer passion over the past year and a  bit more with photobiomodulation. And I would consider that a regenerative modality. A lit -  tle bit about me, I'm a regenerative radiologist. So an MD with a radiology residency, and  we'll go through that a little bit. I did a musculoskeletal and interventional fellowship. I'm an  entrepreneur, started several businesses, including a regenerative medicine clinic, func -  tional medicine clinic, fitness studio, and organ surgical institute, which is the biggest,  busiest orthopedic total joint center in the Pacific Northwest. Current responsibilities, I'm  the CMO, chief medical officer of RedVive Health. We'll talk about the photobiomodulation  company. CEO and founder of Restore PDX, which is the regenerative medicine clinic, ad -  junct clinical professor at Stanford University in their sports medicine department. I'm a  consultant for Arthrex, advisory board member for TendoNova. And then I like to write, I'm  working on several articles right now in publication. And a couple of clinical research  projects.  [0:01:48 ]  I was blessed to be in the right place at the right time, not the smartest guy in the world,  just super curious and started looking at what we were doing, taking lots of pictures before  and after MRIs, got really interested in the field of regenerative medicine and was invited  to volunteer and partake in really defining this field. I was an associate editor for kind of  our Bible on interventional orthopedics. This is myself with the late Jerry Malanga. This is a  legend in the field of physical medicine, rehabilitation, regenerative medicine. This is Dr.  Chris Centeno. He's the founder and owner of Regenexx, which is kind of the largest re -  generative medicine orthopedic. They have 300 clinics around the world and got to speak  at NIH and it's been a lot of fun. I was on the board, past president of this organization.  This is our beautiful facility in Oregon. I'd love for you to come out and visit. We bought the  building and custom designed a regenerative medicine practice. I'm here in my office cur -  rently and I'm also a family man, married with five kids. My wife is a dermatologist. These  09/01/25   Page   of 1   18

SSC 2.0 - 322: Photobiomodulation Part 1  are our babies. We have four girls, identical twins in the middle or after the second and  third. We have a six-year-old son.  [0:03:05]  This is very family oriented. All my family moved out to Oregon with us. This is my sister  and her husband. This is our family, my wife and the five kids, grandparents. We love na -  ture, hiking, travel and that's why I moved to the Pacific Northwest. I absolutely love it. You  can see us in different countries. All my kids are fluent in Chinese. Portland affords that for  us. It's really cool. We got to visit China before COVID and really love doing that. My path  here included, I'm a Buckeye, so OH anybody out there. Bachelor's and probably a lot of  people that are angry about that, but that's where I did my bachelor's degree, did my MBA  at the University of Toledo, radiology residency there, did an internship back in Columbus  and then was blessed to do an interventional and joint fellowship, spine, joints and muscu -  loskeletal imaging and intervention at WashU in St. Louis. What did all that give me? 14  years of training, gave me a really good foundation, but it didn't tell me near what was  about to happen and what journey I was about to go on. I was really good at figuring out  what was wrong with someone and precisely placing a needle into that, and medicine, into  that area.  Before Regenerative Medicine   [0:04:21]  But before regenerative medicine, patients almost always came back. We were using cor -  ticosteroids, we're using ablative procedures, radiofrequency ablation, all palliative stuff.  And I referred a lot of patients to surgery and sometimes they came back after surgery,  even with more pain and dysfunction. It was a pretty vicious cycle. We were using physio -  therapy, medications, surgery, alternative therapy, and a lot of steroid injections.  Taking The Leap   [0:04:47]  And in about 2008-9, I was pretty frustrated with the practice in general. The practice had  gotten really busy. I'm a radiologist and so really good at diagnosing things and doctors in  the community just started sending me patients because I was figuring stuff out. And I'd  look at the imaging and I'd call the doctor when they sent for a specific injection. I said,  could we do maybe something else if it looks like it's that facet on the right that's actually  the pain generator? And after a while of doing this, most of the time I was, you know, the  imaging, the information is there on the imaging, the docs would say, can you just see the  patient? So they started sending me the patients and I went from seeing one patient a  week to a hundred.  [0:05:28]  09/01/25   Page   of 2   18

SSC 2.0 - 322: Photobiomodulation Part 1  And the practice just exploded and I wasn't really ready for that, but it was a really exciting  time. And then in 08 and 09, again, frustrated with palliative care, came across PRP and a  patient, it was a young man, 25 years old in the clinic that I worked at. I had a ski injury  and had two years of chronic shoulder pain. It was partially torn, but not bad enough to do  surgery. It had three or four cortisone injections, tons of physical therapy and absolutely  miserable. Couldn't ski.  Safety Profile   [0:04:58]  And we looked at the, you know, he was talking about platelets. And to me, it was like ho -  cus pocus. This is 2008. I was like, taking somebody's blood and injecting and having it  heal. So I looked in the literature and orthodontics. There were some scant reports, and  then a lot in the equestrian and vet fields.  25 Year Old Male MRI   [0:06:19]  So this was the gentleman. This is an MRI. I'm not sure how accustomed you are to look -  ing at that, but this is the humeral head, the glenoid. This is the rotator cuff tendon, the  supraspinatus coming in. And it looks pretty beat up. It's very irregular. It's not homoge -  neous. This is more how it should look and it kind of has holes in it, these bright areas,  which is fluid. And these dark dots are calcium. So it's dystrophic, partially torn, and this  bright here is bursitis. So really painful. So what had happened is this tendon, which is  type one collagen fibers, cross-linked and very strong in a normal, it's kind of like the rope  you buy at Home Depot, it had broken down. And in these interstices, there's calcifications  and holes. And so you can see this progressive disease process.  Tendon/Ligament Healing Biologically Active Scaffold?   [0:07:04]  So was it possible with regenerative medicine? You know, patients were speaking about  really good outcomes, but I hadn't seen any proof or any imaging or any big studies. So  we tried it. It looked really safe. The patient didn't have any options. We put some PRP, it  was the Harvest system, the first system I ever used. And I don't even know if that's still  available, but we injected PRP. Six weeks later, patient came back. He said, Doc, I have  no pain. I want to ski again. And I was thinking, can it actually go from this torn tendon to  healed? And these were the images that we saw. So he felt better. I looked at it with ultra -  sound. It looked good.  [0:07:41]  09/01/25   Page   of 3   18

SSC 2.0 - 322: Photobiomodulation Part 1  And then I tried to get a scan again with the MRI, and they said, well, insurance is not go -  ing to cover somebody that's feeling better. So I remember to get this bottom row of MRIs,  I had to buy the tech a Subway sandwich at the end of the day. And so that's how this  started with the subway sandwich. So we can thank Subway. Here is a circle around this  diseased tendon. We went in with ultrasound guidance and injected fenestrated, put little  holes in the tendon and injected PRP right into that tissue. Six weeks later, it looked native.  Like that's a brand new tendon. Okay, so that's that type one collagen fibers. It's linear. It's  compact. It's functional and it's painless. Another case, a few weeks later, this started to  spread like wildfire within the community that, hey, this is actually working and it's legit.  And here's pictures. And we weren't advertising for it or anything. This patient came in as a  school teacher. This is an Achilles tendon. This should look like this. This is the plantar  fascia here. It should be nice and dark and contiguous. There's a big hole in it and it's real -  ly tendinopathic, that beat up looking tendon and there's a gap.  [0:08:42]  And I'd never treated this with regenerative medicine. Surgery was an option. She was a  school teacher. It was beginning of summer. She was saying, I need to get back to being  able to walk, completely miserable, high levels of pain. And so that's the area of injury.  Here it is under ultrasound, which we'll talk a little bit about TMJ. I'm an advocate and radi -  ologist. I think everything should be injected under visualization. Here's the gap. Here's a  needle. You can see it so well and we're injecting the platelets filling that gap. And these  are the MRIs. Now I was buying lots of Subway sandwiches, the big party packs. And we  were looking at it here.  [0:09:22]  And here's the first MRI. So this is sequential interval of four months with two injections.  And you can see this is the side view or sagittal view where it's filling in, filling in and  healed. And now this is an axial view. So slices through the axis of the kind of perpendicu -  lar to the tendon. And you can see here, the bright is the gap. Here's the normal tendon  and you see it slowly fill in. This patient was pain free after a few months, totally functional,  one treatment, one and done. Left with needles, sorry, just pokes, band-aids and no  surgery.  Achilles Tendinopathy & Tear   [0:09:57]  This was another 47 year old, probably the worst tendinopathy that I've seen or other doc -  tors have seen here. We're not exactly sure why that happened. Huge gap, we think  maybe Cipro, but huge gap, tendinopathic all the way through, eight out of 10 pain. And  this had been progressive and there's a little bit of tendon left. And this was a large defect.  So we used bone marrow fat platelets, combined them into a bio gel and I'll show you that  later. And we injected about 20 cc's into this tendon and that's one year later. And this was  augmented with photobiomodulation. So daily, twice daily dose of photobiomodulation.  09/01/25   Page   of 4   18

SSC 2.0 - 322: Photobiomodulation Part 1  This is a very challenging patient. And you can see who that is right there. That was me.  And it was life-saving. Like this was a really, really, it took about a year for it to generate it  to that level. And it was super miserable. So a little bit more compelling maybe to what  we're talking about with TMJ and arthritis. This is not supposed to happen, right?  Patellofemoral Disease   [0:10:57]  So this is patellofemoral disease. So this is 2018, patellofemoral chondromalacia. Huge full  thickness defect. You could hear this patient walking down the hallway with their knee. It  was grinding. And there's a huge defect there. It's like delamination. So you can see this is  the bone. The subchondral plate is the dark line here. And then the gray is cartilage. You  can see this image shows beautiful cartilage. There's an effusion. So there's a lot of fluid in  here. So this stands out. So there's fluid filling that gap. You can see here. This is four  years later. After cell therapy, just an injection into the joint, nothing else. No oats, no year-  long rehab, no six, eight weeks, six months of non-weight bearing. This was an injection.  Put a band-aid on. Rest a few days and then get back to activities. And the cartilage re -  generates. You can see here it's like a big bite taken out of it and that's filled in. It's pretty  incredible. And this patient was pain-free.  Knee Osteoarthritis   [0:11:51]  This is another case, weight-bearing. This is the femoral condo. We're looking at the knee  in the coronal plane from the front. And there's a full thickness cartilage loss. Here you can  see the cartilage here, so a delaminated fragment, subchondral edema. You can see that  here and on the T1, you can see well that it's completely denuded. There's a little bit of de -  lamination. In this one, we did intraosseous. I actually found an article. I've got to get it. If  anybody has that journal, I'll send it to you. Please send that article if you have access. But  it's on TMJ, intraarticular and intraosseous injections. So super interesting. We've been  doing a lot of this in our field, large joints, shoulders, knees, hips. We're going into the  bone, into the subchondral plate. You can see this dark stuff here is contrast. And you can  see that injecting and it's starting to seep into the subchondral plate, the interface between  the bone and the cartilage. You can see that here, the needle is placed. And then I'm  putting contrast. You can see a little flowing into the marrow cavity. And here it's getting  close to that subchondral plate. And this was a year later. Patient had complete resolution  of pain, skiing, doing all the things they want to do. And it's not full thickness, which would  be all the way here. But it's almost, you know, it's completely covering the bone, which is  actually where the pain generation is. And you can see there's a nice layer of cartilage.  [0:13:06]  And this is a year out. You can see the full thickness here. That's gone. And then here's  09/01/25   Page   of 5   18

SSC 2.0 - 322: Photobiomodulation Part 1  another ACL view where you can see that that defect is now filled in with cartilage. And  you can see here, these are the... this is the cases and the corresponding images. So this  is mind blowing to me that this can actually happen. These are some other cases of se -  vere arthritis. And what we'll see with, you know, if you do MRI imaging of TMJ and the  condyle and the joint space itself and the subchondral bone is you get significant bone  marrow edema at times. And this patient, all that pain, this inflammation was occurring in  the subchondral bone. And this was just an intraarticular injection of PRP. And this was at  85 year old gentleman. So patient had an amazing response. You can see all of the bone  marrow edema and swelling is gone. He lives up in Whidbey Island or something like that  in Seattle area and sails. That's his big passion, his wife and him and was able to get back  to all the things he wanted to do with a simple PRP injection or similar to what a lot of  you're using with PRF. You know, we're seeing this pretty consistently. So I'll kind of pass  through here.  Talonavicular Joint Arthritis   [0:14:24]  This is a Talonavicular Joint Arthritis. So similar, like going into the bone. This is dead  necrotic bone. So cystic changes here. That's a cyst. Bone marrow edema throughout the  talus. This is at the ankle bone midfoot. And you can see these subchondral areas of  necrosis. So when we inject, we inject the joint, but we're also putting a jam sheety needle  into the bone and injecting. And you can see here the follow up a few months later, that  cyst has resorbed that sclerotic wall, which is shocking to me that we're able to get the  bodies that bioactive, that it can eat through that sclerosis and create new bone and a new  joint. This patient was in his 70s. We did this therapy. He couldn't walk when he came in  on crutches. And then after we finished, he is now several years out walking the Pacific  Crest Trail. We just astounding as far as the functional improvements. And this is called  the American Buddhist. I like cartoons. You guys can read that. So that's how I felt running  around the clinic.  Platelet Rich Plasma   [0:15:29]  And then when we got into stem cells and regenerative medicine, they call it kind of the  PRP or PRF is kind of the gateway drug for us started using it, seeing all these amazing  results and then as we needed to when we moved to more challenging cases or more se -  vere disease, we started to use the stem cells and saw a benefit. So when I talk to pa -  tients, growth factors or platelets or PRF or amniotic growth factors, you know, that's for  mild disease gardens growing, not giving enough crop. You want to move in that direction.  Cell therapies, whether it be autologous or allogeneic, usually it's more severe disease.  You know, you have barren patch of dirt. If you use growth factors, you might get weeds.  09/01/25   Page   of 6   18

SSC 2.0 - 322: Photobiomodulation Part 1  But if you want to plant the seeds and the cells and the growth factors, and we can push  towards a good crop. So we do in our clinic autologous fat, which is absolutely amazing. I'll  show you that we do bone marrow aspiration and we combine them. We also combine that  with PRP or platelet lysate or PRF and so growth factors. So the seeds and the growth  factors, the fertilizer, and then we treat the whatever structure. Since we're in Oregon, we  have our umbrella. Because rainy here. So the anti-inflammatory factors. So IRAP, A2M,  the growth factors. The growth factors, extracellular matrix. These are the amniotic, am -  nion, chorion derived products, even prolotherapy and PRP is in that middle.  [0:16:53]  So you're getting some anti-inflammatory effects, but also you're getting a lot of growth  and healing effects. And then our strongest, which we believe to be like bone marrow aspi -  rate concentrate, liposporic concentrate, allogenic cells. This, you know, we do our a lot of  the therapies that we do. I treat a lot of spine and joints, as you've seen. Our triple threat is  fat, bone marrow and PRP or platelets. And so this is a video of our fat. This is processed.  We've done liposuction and this has been processed. We can see how viscous and thick  this is. So when we're filling defects like that Achilles, we put this into spinal discs. We're  doing complete ACL ruptures. So this is our surgery, surgical suites. This is our medicines.  And, you know, we combine them. So you can see that this is like a knee. So, you know,  the ACL, PCL, intraarticular, medial meniscus, MCL. This is intraosseous tibia. So we'll  combine those and put those into different areas. This is where we go into the... for bone  marrow, we do the iliac crest.  Ultrasound Guided Lipoaspiration   [0:17:58]  For fat, we use ultrasound guided lipoaspiration. So we do the infiltration with the tumes -  cent. We let it sit for a while. It's called percolation and then we aspirate. We don't need a  big fancy machine. We just use a syringe and a Johnny lock. You can see actually with ul -  trasound, you can see that this is normal fat. There's the cannula and that's the tumescent  fat. It's brighter. You can see that's fat here. And this is the infiltrated echogenics is brighter  fat. That's the layer that we're treating. So we're actually submitting this for publication.  And then you can see our different PRP, bone marrow aspirate concentrate fat, and the  platelet-poor plasma. We treat ligaments. This is a radial collateral ligament here. You can  see there's a tear in it. Here, this is the post, it's healed. This is the pre, I should flip this,  but this is the pre. You can see large tear here and joint effusion. It's an unstable joint. So  that's the other thing that when treating joints, when we're treating those supportive struc -  tures, even the capsule or the disc and say that the TMJ that you'll get improved stability.  And here you have all that inflammation, the effusion is resolved. This was a rotator cuff, a  small full thickness tear and then it healed. And in the consideration of time, I'm gonna run  through these pretty quickly.  [0:19:14]  09/01/25   Page   of 7   18

SSC 2.0 - 322: Photobiomodulation Part 1  We are doing complete ACL rupture. So this is a complete ACL rupture with translation.  Our surgeon recommended surgery, obviously the standard of care reconstruction. And  you can see actually the ligament is completely torn. It's hanging in the breeze here. We  use a specific technique, that foundation that I worked for, we develop different techniques  and we teach these. So this is one of them using X-ray guidance. And we actually place  six different locations. We treat this ACL and we can get the ACL, that's a native looking  ACL there. And we can get this torn one. And this is about six, eight weeks afterwards, it's  still lax. That's three months afterwards and it's healed. And we put contrast and inject  along the course. So we're basically getting this torn ligament or diseased ligament and  enable it to heal. This was a cool case in the equestrian. This was a professional rider that  was, their horse got spooked, the horse kicked them in the knee. When she looked down,  her kneecap was hanging off to the side. She had torn her MCL completely, her ACL com -  pletely and the medial patella femoral ligaments. She flew to us, relatively well to do, flew  to us from Georgia.  [0:20:24]  We did cell therapy instead of three surgeries and 18 months of rehab. This was several  weeks later when she went back, she had the means to go get MRIs. And so she started  following it up. She's doing well clinically. And you can see that now there's bridging across  this ligament. Here are the few weeks later, it's even more robust and taut. You can actual -  ly see here that it's connected. The medial patella femoral ligaments are healing, MCL is  healing. Seven months later, she had a brand new knee. It was right as normal at Emory  University. So without surgery, complete rupture of the ACL was healed. We have about 40  cases like this. Here's the MCL, which was a grade three, complete rupture and there it's  healing and it's healed. So zero, three and seven months transition. So you can see here  at zero or time of injury, complete rupture of the ACL, seven weeks bridging, 11 weeks,  much more robust and seven months, normal and she's back to riding.  Diagnostic Ultrasound   [0:21:26]  These are other cases where we use ultrasound. You can see the holes in the tendon.  This is the asymptomatic tendon. So this is the radius, the humerus. This is the common  extensor tendon here. The tendon is sitting on top of the bone. This is the right side, which  is symptomatic and you can kind of see it looks like Swiss cheese with all these holes in it.  This is the needle precisely placing the medicine into that tissue. And over time, this is a  follow-up in three months, pain score was zero up to three with repetitive motions, about  80% improvement. When you look at it, it still doesn't look great. The holes are gone, but  it's filled in with that substrate, that graft. And this is what's happening in different tissues  that you're injecting. I thought this was a great example of this is sticking around and it's,  here's four to five months. So it's still there. It's a little bit less conspicuous. Patient contin -  ued improvement, zero out of 10 daily pain. And this is nine months where it's completely  09/01/25   Page   of 8   18

SSC 2.0 - 322: Photobiomodulation Part 1  healed. All the holes are gone and it's filled in with native tendons. So it may take time. So  then you can see here, Swiss cheese. Now you have the block of cheese.  Intra-Meniscal Therapy   [0:22:26]  Meniscal therapy, there's a torn meniscus, parameniscal cyst in the knee. So this is akin to  like a disc. We actually go into the meniscus and inject this.   This was torn. It was delami -  nated and there was a cyst that had developed from it. We went in with ultrasound and in -  jected the joint and injected the meniscus itself and it healed. The cyst resolved. So this  was now coapted, stuck together. This is an image with the femoral condyle, the tibial  plateau, MCL, that's the outside of the knee. And we drop a needle in here in short axis  and you can actually see this is the meniscus here, that triangular structure. And this bright  stuff is the medicine that we placed. So we placed it into this triangular structure here,  here, here and fill that gap. And over time it healed and the cyst resolved and the patient  was functional. This is another one where it's a transectional tear. So you've lost hoop  strength. This is pretty disastrous, catastrophic as far as pain. There's no great surgical  procedure. This patient was 70. She was a dancer, felt something pop dancing and she  had had a near transection... There may have been a strand left, but near transectional  tear. We injected and saw on the follow-up that it was actually bridged and she was danc -  ing and back.  [0:23:40]  I see her around town now and then, but it's probably been seven or eight years since that  case. We do discs and spine. This is a large herniation, it's kind of backwards, but with  large herniation extrusion here, sitting on top of the nerve, it's an MRI of the lumbar spine,  and we treat it with just a PRF, PRP in the epidural space, instead of using epidural  steroids, we use the platelets, and within, this was my first case ever, within a week he  called and said, my pain is completely gone. My radicular pain had been almost a year,  and we looked back and you saw the disc kind of dissolve within a few weeks. This is an -  other patient that had large herniation and extrusion. We injected the epidural space, we  also put it in the disc, and that the tear healed and also the extruded material went away.  Intra-Discal Therapy - The Game Changer   [0:24:31]  I know how well this works because again, I'm kind of a musculoskeletal mess. I have  Ehlers-Danlos type syndrome, so I'm very hypermobile, so I can bend my thumb back like  this, my wrist, my elbow is hyperlaxed. I'm good at yoga, bad at football, and this is my  back L4-5 that was injected. See my name here. It was absolutely game changer for me,  so we're preventing a lot of patients from having these massive, horrible fusions, replace -  ments, we're doing cervical discs. Here's a massive extrusion, and this is the post-op or  09/01/25   Page   of 9   18

SSC 2.0 - 322: Photobiomodulation Part 1  post-treatment imaging where the disc is completely resolved and the herniation is com -  pletely resolved, and the disc is now resilient and healed. This is a physician that had se -  vere disc disease and bone marrow edema, so super painful disc in the lumbar spine, her -  niated. We treated them into the disc and kind of the functional spinal unit a year out, two  years out, complete resolution of the pain, and now structural integrity was achieved.  Here's another case, huge disc herniation. This is the before, you're pressing on the nerve  root with low back pain and sciatica, and here's the after where this looks native and nor -  mal. Pretty consistent. We use all image guidance, the fluoroscopic techniques, thoracic.  Spine herniations are really challenging because you have the rib cage, surgeries are real -  ly, really difficult, and if somebody has something that is recalcitrant to kind of conservative  measures, very challenging to treat. This was a patient that we treated, younger guy, I  think it was in the military and had a traumatic injury.  [0:26:02]  This had been a long time and you can see these herniations with tears in the disc here  and here, and we treated them and the herniation is dramatically diminished in size and  the tear is healed. So this patient was asymptomatic. I'm just talking about the in -  terosseous injections a little bit. This is some imaging of how we used to do. When I first  came out of training, I worked at a place called Epic Imaging in Portland, and they had a  couple of ENT specialist radiologists, and we had to do a lot of TMJ arthrograms. So we  got pretty good at doing that. So under x-ray, this is kind of a straight down view of the  joint, and you can see if you tilt the beam, you can get it across the joint space and you  can see the joint well here, place a needle. Here's the condyle, here's the joint space and  a needle placement in there. And then that's kind of the old school where we would see  the arthrogram and place the contrast and then we would review that or look at that with  MRI and they would do open and closed mouth views and assess disc movement. Ultra -  sound is really game changing. We use that all the time.  [0:27:12]  The joint is very easily visualized and injected. You can see here is the condyle, the joint  space, the temporal bone, and you can see the articular disc here in the joint space. So  this is a long axis view. So if you're looking like the ultrasound in this plane and you want  to come from caudal to cephalad, you can get right. There's the mandibular condyle, the  eminence, and you can get the needle right into that joint. And here you can see the same  things. Here's the capsule. You can do open and closed mouth dynamic evaluation and  see if there's any disc extrusion or any other issues. Here's the needle placement into the  condyle, 27&30 gauge, depending on what you're injecting. Here's another really nice view  of that technique. You can ask some questions on, I think this would be a fairly easy pro -  cedure to integrate into your practices, especially if you're putting really expensive material  into the joint.  So.. What Does this have to do with RedVive Therapy?   [0:28:16]  09/01/25   Page   of 10   18

SSC 2.0 - 322: Photobiomodulation Part 1  There are some nice articles out there for that. And I'd be happy to teach, to train, to show  you folks how to do that. I've done several of them. It's not something that we try to do, but  we've done other joints where we have some left. It's such a small joint. If we have our liq -  uid goal and somebody has bad, we've had several patients that had really bad TMJ and  ejected them with that. And they've had profound improvement with either PRP or some -  times that combination of bone marrow PRP or fat. So what does this have to do with  RedVive therapy? RedVive is a company that we started about six, eight months ago, and  it's centered around photobiomodulation. And so photobiomodulation can be both low-level  laser therapy or low-level light therapy. What we're using is, you know, light is light. So  we're using LED technology. These are powerful LEDs that emit various wavelengths of  red and near-infrared light. And what we're trying to do is augment the healing pathways.  Anything that we can do to leverage our success, we're going to do those things. So suc -  cessful medicine, regenerative medicine therapy to me, we talk about precision diagnosis,  precision delivery, precision biologics. Those are the three tenets of that. And you have to  have all three legs to do well. And then there's the foundations of health. So the founda -  tions of health include wellness habits, energy-based medicine, functional medicine, hor -  mones, mind, spirit, and nutritional supplements.  Where Does RedVive Fit In?   [0:29:50]  So where does the RedVive fit in? It's kind of that carpet, the foundations of health. And  one of the things that we love about it is that the patients can take it home. It does not  have to be integrated into the clinic. You can send it home with them. So we can do that  and it can augment the cell therapies and regenerative medicine. I did an internship in  Memphis, Tennessee at this hospital, St. Jude's Research Hospital. And this is the first  paid for indication of photobiomodulation with LED therapy. And this is something that they  use for oral mucositis. So after these four kids have chemo radiation, they get oral mucosi -  tis and some of your sloughing of the oral mucosa. And this has been shown to be kind of  the gold standard and standard of care at this time. And so they are now covering this. So  it's pretty amazing technology that something so easy and simple can help. And really, I've  been using this for about seven years in my practice and then leveraged this with a com -  pany, photobiomodulation, working with Mike, who you'll meet later on, about six, eight  months.  Next After Regenerative Medicine   [0:31:01]  And so this is the next, after regenerative medicine, I'm back to the American Buddhist  phase. I got the haircut down. The studies that I looked at and sleep is something that I  09/01/25   Page   of 11   18

SSC 2.0 - 322: Photobiomodulation Part 1  definitely need to, I was supposed to pull some articles. I didn't get time to do that, but this  is my own test. So I use Oura Ring and I noticed that I was getting fantastic sleep after us -  ing photobiomodulation and it was pretty profound. This was one, this internal view of that  is last year, Thursday, October 26th, 23. I had a poor night of sleep. It was 55 out of 100.  So 55 out of 100, and you can see my deep sleep is at 15 minutes, REM is 52 latency. I  was laying in bed for a long time. Heart rate was 65 average, 59 low, 66 average HRV,  heart rate variability. And then 35 was the average. I did a full body photostimulation, re-  radiation, both front and back for about 15, 20 minutes. And then the next light of sleep,  sleep score and trying to improve my sleep hygiene, sleep score of 88. You can see the  deep sleep was hour and six, REM 148, got to bed pretty quickly.  [0:32:20]  Lowest heart rate was 45, average 52. And then this HRV was profoundly improved. So  some of the things I noticed that if you use this, I hope that you guys integrate it into your  own lives and into the lives of your patients. This is one of the first things that you're gonna  notice. When we started the company, I really wanted to understand if this was real. Again,  I'm a skeptic at first for all these things, just like PRP and regenerative medicine. And so I  went to London, I got my hard rock cafe shirt and learned about regenerative medicine  and learn in the realm of photobiomodulation. This is the World Association of Light Thera -  py or WALT. It was 153 speakers from, you know, bent scientists to translational research  to clinical research, profound. It was absolutely amazing. And the thing that I came out of it  and I really wanted to understand is an LED as good as a laser. There's a lot of studies on  low-level laser therapy and can an LED produce the same effect? And what I came out  with after speaking with all the top docs in the world, scientists, researchers, clinicians, is  that light is light.  [0:33:22]  And it's really important that if you're doing it, doses, dose is what matters. You have to  have a really good light source. It has to have the correct wavelengths and it has to have  the correct irradiance or power. And it's gonna affect those types of positive effects. The  other benefits of a LED system is that it can't, you know, it's not gonna burn you. It's a  class two device and it can go home. With our clinic, we're a very busy clinic. You know, I  don't want to have patients having to come back all the time. There is a manual cost of an  FTE or two to operate a laser system. It can be used in conjunction because the laser is  coherent light. It's very focused. It can help with a small area. But I wanna talk a little bit  about the benefits of the LED. I like the more diffuse incoherent light and I like its systemic  effects. One of the studies I'll talk about a little bit is the profound effect it has on stem  cells. So when we do our therapies, this is somebody that's getting a stem cell therapy, we  prime them or irradiate them before, it's called preconditioning, prior to their procedure.  [0:34:24]  And then when they go home, we send it home with them. So even if they're, this is be -  fore, this is my friend that's getting a stem cell and this is my daughter that's a competitive  climber. She's doing her preconditioning. So when you think about these things, they're  systemic and there's targeted therapy.  09/01/25   Page   of 12   18

SSC 2.0 - 322: Photobiomodulation Part 1  Treatment Method - Systemic & Targeted   [0:34:38]  So we talk about the systemic therapy when you see the sleep effects. And then if you  have an injury or you're preconditioning or you had a hard leg workout, you can do target -  ed therapy. For skin, this is my 16 year old. It helped her tremendously with her hormonal  acne. It didn't take it away, but it dramatically reduces the kind of inflammatory effect. And,  you know, we have animal cells. What we're doing is converting light energy into biochem -  ical energy, and we can do that through our mitochondria. Plant cells have mitochondria as  well, but they have chloroplasts, so they're a lot more efficient. But we have those same  biochemical pathways of converting that light. We use the visible and the near-infrared  spectrum. And so with visible light, it doesn't penetrate as deeply. As you start to get into  the near-infrared, that's what we're using for photobiomodulation.  Laser VS LED   [0:35:25]  Far-infrared can cause thermal heating, kind of using for sauna, creating shockwave pro -  teins is beneficial, but it's different. So photobiomodulation, PBM, is going to exert those  different effects. And so we're using a very small in the electromagnetic spectrum. We're  using a small area of the visible light, this red light, and then a portion of the near-infrared.  So laser is coherent, monochromatic. LED is non-coherent and polychromatic. Lasers  might be able to get deeper and they're more focused, whereas the non-coherent poly -  chromatic, you're going to get more wavelengths, more effect, and more of a systemic ef -  fect. You can still get local effect and local benefits. And this is just something that you  guys, I can send you this. You can take a picture of it, or if you want to do a screen cap -  ture, but this is the differences between laser and LEDs. We made this internally, and you  can see that we'll talk about some of the benefits. Our RV60 or RedVibe 60 is 60 lights, 30  and 30, 670 and 810. So this is going to be in that red spectrum, and this is near-infrared,  so we won't be able to see the near-infrared.  [0:36:34]  So it looked like half of these lights are not on, and that's not the case. Here you could ac -  tually see that there's red and there's ones that look like they're not on. Those are the  near-infrared. So on our RV300s, 300 light panels, so a much bigger device, much broader  spectrum, you're going to get two red light wavelengths, but there's 150 of these, and then  150 of the near-infrared.  What Influence Dose?   [0:37:02]  09/01/25   Page   of 13   18

SSC 2.0 - 322: Photobiomodulation Part 1  So what influences dose is the time that you're in front of the machine, it's how far away  from the device you are, and it's the power of the LEDs. There is a kind of biphasic re -  sponse curve. We want to stay in the optimal dose. If you don't get enough, it's not going  to be effective. If you do too much, you'll lose some of the benefits that you've been trying  to achieve. You'll get too much thermal issue, and it's not going to be helpful. So there is  an optimal range. The good news is that's a pretty broad range, and it's something that is  specific to the individual. So you have to use some titration and see how they're feeling.  [0:37:36]  But this is, you know, start on the lower end. You can do once a day. You can do twice a  day at home. If they're coming into the clinic and doing it even three to four times a week,  three times a week, two times a week is probably, it's better than nothing and probably  enough to stimulate a lot of benefits. The elevator speech that I have for photobiomodula -  tion, kind of the holy trinity of photobiomodulation, is mitochondrial efficiency and activa -  tion, TRPV1 antagonism. So this mitochondrial activity, that's going to increase energy,  TRPV1 receptor antagonism on the nerve cells is going to reduce pain and provide healing  for neuropathic conditions over time. That's repeated microdosing. And then activation of  stem cells.  Indications   [0:38:20]  And you can see here all of the different indications that we have. And so that's why, you  know, one of the benefits is that it can treat so many things because it's working at a cellu -  lar level. One of the downsides is it can treat so many things and it sounds like snake oil.  And it being a class two device, it's kind of incumbent upon us. And that's why we've really  taken that and run with it with our company is to educate providers.  [0:38:41]  So mitochondrial efficiency, we have red and near-infrared light. If it's shined on or radiates  cells, it'll hit the mitochondria. And what it's doing, it's going to displace nitric oxide. There's  some benefits of that with oxygen on the cytochrome C oxidase within the electron trans -  port chain. When that happens, every cycle that that goes through, it's able to produce 32  ATP instead of two. So you're getting a 16-fold increase in efficiency of this electron trans -  port chain. Okay, so there's a few different ways that we can make ATP. And one of them is  oxidative phosphorylation in the electron transport chain. And you're just turbocharging  that with this light therapy. Some of the other benefits of that, one, you're getting a ton of  ATP. You're displacing nitric oxide. So it's a potent vasodilator, improves circulation, de -  creases inflammation. And then you're creating reactive oxygen species and creating a  hormetic effect. So you think it's, you know, you don't want oxidation, but you're creating it  to a certain level. And that's why there could be some deleterious effects if you overstimu -  late that you're creating ROS and that's creating a hormetic effect or protective effect. And  09/01/25   Page   of 14   18

SSC 2.0 - 322: Photobiomodulation Part 1  you're changing the way the nucleus is creating transcription factors and you're improving  the cell health.  [0:39:52]  You're making the tissues more resilient and healthy. So we're seeing that in the 680 and  810, there's peaks here. And so that's where we're focusing our light panels on energy and  on musculoskeletal health. There's tons of studies. If you look up photobiomodulation,  there's about 12,000 studies out there since, I think, the mid-2000s. And you can see here  that these are different wavelengths that are showing different benefits. So 630 for os -  teoarthritis, 830 for diabetic wounds. But it's more than wavelength.  More Than Just Wavelengths   [0:40:27]  So part of it's the wavelengths, part of it's the intensity or power of the light. So we have a  third-party tested device in RedVibe. We wanted to make sure that we were providing the  highest level quality and energy, that we're creating the proper dose in the tissues. And  that's been validated, and anybody that wants that, we can send that to them. The tem -  perature of the cell is important, so we don't want overheating. So there can be a thermal  effect if you do it for too long, too close, or you're in a sauna. There's a lot of companies  that are doing kind of this combined. I have it at home, so I know that it's real.  [ 0:40:57]  I have a sauna that has a red light in it, and I don't put them on at the same time. You have  to use them asynchronously. Anything over about 108 degrees Fahrenheit, you lose the  photobiomodulation effects. You get benefits of sauna, but you lose some of the PBM ef -  fects. So you want to do them asynchronously or kind of staggered. And also circadian  rhythm. Super interesting research shows that different times of the day, different mito -  chondria can turn on and off. Here's the shifting cellular patterns and energy production,  which is pretty cool. So I do it twice a day, short bursts, seven minutes in the morning,  seven minutes at night, and feel probably the best I've felt in a long time, my chronic pain  in my low back. I have a little bit of listesis and disc issues, as you saw before. It's been  tremendously helped with regenerative medicine, but there always was a little bit of dis -  comfort and pain, and now that's gone if I use this on a daily basis. And it seems to have  gotten better and better and better over the past several months. But that's that microdos -  ing. When you do this at night, I get better sleep, as we saw before.  TRVP1 Receptor + Red Light   [0:41:53]  TRPV1 receptor antagonism, so patients that use this or clients that use this post-surgical,  post-injection, or even before, just kind of maintenance, they'll notice almost immediate  benefits. So if you use this over, say, the TMJ and they have severe pain and neuropathic  09/01/25   Page   of 15   18

SSC 2.0 - 322: Photobiomodulation Part 1  issues, they will have an immediate desensitization of this region. So they'll have pain, that  analgesic effect. So what it's doing is down regulating the TRPV1   receptor, and so you  have an immediate analgesic effect. As you continue to do this, it modulates those pain  receptors, and over time, chronic neuropathic pain or chronic pain actually gets desensi -  tized, and you can get improvement in neuropathic pain. You get nerve healing and cell  repair. And so that's that targeted therapy. What about the systemic therapy? What is that  about? They did studies with brain injury, and they used transcranial devices to stimulate  what we have just talked about. So mitochondrial activity, transcription factors, and local -  ized cell healing, and you get a healthy restored brain neurons. But they also did a control  group that didn't see benefit, and they did another group where they did indirect stimula -  tion, so the systemic response. And they shined light, irradiated the femur, irradiated the  gut, and they saw restored brain health.  Activation of Circulatory Stem & Immune Cells   [0:43:05]  The mechanisms of this is that it's stimulating immune cells, it's stimulating stem cells, and  they're flooding the circulation. That's what really got me super excited as a regenerative  medicine specialist. So we use photobiomodulation. They did a study that they drew blood.  They spun it down. So they drew blood, and they measured the CD34 cells and the  macrophages. And then they irradiated just the tibia with low-level light therapy. Two hours  later, they drew blood again, and then every day for four days. On average, at two hours,  there was a 300% increase in circulating CD34 positive cells. That's how they identified  the mesenchymal stem cells. And there was a 1,000% increase in macrophage activity, so  an immune cell that's going to promote healing. And then there was another study that  showed that they actually shifted the phenotype of the macrophage from an M1 pheno -  type, more inflammatory, to an M2, which is more anti-inflammatory and healing. You can  see that some of these patients had that boost of cell activity out to four days. Some of  them had a boost that first day, and then it died down. So when you look at this as far as  the dosing patterns, they talk about anywhere between two and three days a week, or you  can do it every day and that's going to be a little patient-specific and something that you  can titrate with the patients.  Shift of M1 to M2 with PBM   [0:44:26]  Here's another study that talks about that phenotypic change from M1 to M2 with photo -  biomodulation, and there's a lot of discussion in regenerative medicine that we do the  same things when we're injecting PRP, growth factor, or stem cells, that this is actually  happening in one of the mechanisms of healing. This is another device that they've been  using at St. Jude to get young children to get the LED therapy. Here's a study, and I was  09/01/25   Page   of 16   18

SSC 2.0 - 322: Photobiomodulation Part 1  looking at this just today. That's why I was wondering, if anybody had this, I'd love to see it.  But this was a randomized controlled double-blind study on light-emitting diodes, so what  we're using, so simultaneous red and infrared that dramatically and significantly reduce  pain in patients with TMJ. And so imagine that not only are you helping them with pain, but  you're stimulating that healing response. And so if you're using PRF, you precondition  them, get it to them even a few weeks earlier, let them start that healing process, and then  you can treat them. And the other beautiful thing about this is wellness.  [0:45:27]  This affects systemically. This is not a device that they would just use for this and stick in  the closet and not use. This is something that becomes part of the wellness habit. Who  doesn't want 300% more stem cells circulating in their system? With some frequency, it's  going to traverse your blood-brain barrier. As far as brain disease and cognitive decline, it  can help with those. Here's some other articles with that.  Safety   [0:45:51]  Safety, non-ionizing radiation, minimal temporary side effects, you know, it's a class 2 de -  vice. It's been demonstrated to be very safe. You can buy it anywhere. You want to make  sure that it's proper. You can buy it on Amazon, but we don't know what you're getting. Low  risk of burns, eye safety, no long-term risks, contraindications, active cancer, pregnancy,  don't shine it on the womb, photosensitive skin conditions or specific medications. Usually  those are UV sensitive. There's a very specific wavelength, so you shouldn't have that. But  if you have these in your offices, which I would recommend, having a kind of a test device  or somebody wants to come in, they're getting, they're able to come with some frequency.  We have them set up both in the office and then you can send it home with them.  [0:46:31]  Be careful if you start using this. We are thinking about in the next, you know, several  months or a couple of years, looking at some pulsed options and then you want to be a  little bit more careful with patients with epilepsy. Looking at this with the anti-aging ques -  tions and systemic wellness product. So photobiomodulation mitigates cardiovascular ag -  ing and improves survival. Look as far as cognitive decline, Alzheimer's, sexual health.  There's some on sexual dysfunction.  What Are We Trying To Do with PBM? - RIPE   [0:47:07]  So it's pretty amazing because it's working at that cellular level. So this is, you know, I like  acronyms or this is kind of, we talk about what are we trying to do is keep things ripe and  healthy. So reduce inflammation and pain, improve circulation, promote tissue repair and  regeneration and enhances recovery from injuries. It's, we want to make it really easy. You  09/01/25   Page   of 17   18

SSC 2.0 - 322: Photobiomodulation Part 1  know, this is a really, really fun project to work on. It's the fantastic device. It's really simple  and it's dramatically improving our patients' lives and increasing our efficiency of doing our  procedures. So it's easy to integrate and implement into the protocols. We basically have  integrated it and embedded it into our system. So if somebody gets PRP, they get a small  panel. If somebody gets a bigger cell therapy, they get a large panel.  [0:47:48]  And unless they opt out, that's part of the program. It's user friendly. It's super easy.  There's clear safety guidelines. So we're kind of just adding this to your superpowers as  clinicians to help your patients to stay on the cutting edge. And we really want to use that  educational approach. So that's why we're educating the clinician so you can pass that  education on to be a fiduciary and advocate for your patients. It's patient-centered care. It's  an extension of your care and it empowers the patient. We have a dual role as healthcare  provider and treatment advocate. It's easy to use, enhancing recovery. It's a seamless in -  tegration into the treatment plan. Mike's going to talk about how you can implement it into  your practices really easily. We've done that with my practice. I do not want my staff deal -  ing with selling something, dealing with returns, questions. So they handle all of that. We  don't have to hold inventory. I mean, it's such a nice business model. It's been fantastic.  We've added about a quarter of a million dollars in revenue to our practice in a single year  because of this. It empowers the patient.  [0:48:52]  I've been really, really happy with the outcomes and the patients love it. They are able to  do something. They feel empowered to do something on an everyday basis. They feel  good. I mean, it's an obvious device that helps with healing, reducing pain. So they love it  and it's easy to do. It's a very passive therapy. It has dramatically decreased our narcotic  use. I don't know if you have much need for that. I'm not sure in your clinical practices, but  you saw the things that we're doing and that stuff hurts. And so if we're able to reduce it by  50%, 75%, what a boon. So it's been pretty awesome.  [Go to your Webinar Archives to continue watching (November 2024)]  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 18   18

