SSC 2.0 - 318: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 2  SSC 2.0   Level 3  318: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc  Part 2  [intro music]  What About Arthrocentesis?   [0:00:12]  Now, what about arthrocentesis? So we're gonna go through some studies now on why I  think you need to be the one to do the unlocking procedure and not our oral surgery col -  leagues. And again, there's nothing against oral surgeons. Oral surgeons are awesome. I  think we all know they're the smartest amongst us. We all know that the kids in our class  that went on to oral surgery, they were pretty bright, right? They were pretty good. And oral  surgeons know the anatomy. They know what a non-reducing disc displacement is. It's not  that they're guessing. It's not that they're saying something that's not true like a lot of den -  tists do. Most dental professionals do not understand what a reducing disc displacement  is, nor a non-reducing displacement. Oral surgeons do. But oral surgeons also are basical -  ly the dumping ground for any TMJ problem. And then they are trying to help 'cause who  else is gonna help? Remember my discussion here at the beginning is like, who else is  gonna do this if you don't do this? So that's where oral surgeons lie.  Multiple Different Treatment Options   [0:01:18]  So this study I showed in SSC 1.0, but I wanna go over this 'cause it's a really good one  that, where they looked at multiple different treatment options. So 85 patients with unilat -  eral non-reducing disc displacements and they did an MRI, made sure they were off the  disc, and then they put them into one of four groups. Splint therapy by itself, a pumping  manipulation group. So that probably involved sticking something in the joint and moving  their jaw. Arthrocentesis, flushing out the joint, and then arthroscopic surgery, going in with  a scope, ideally visualizing the joint, trying to get it back into place. So not full-on open  joint surgery with like an incision and stuff, but going in arthroscopically and trying to ma -  nipulate the disc position. So there's your four treatments and then they did a post-MRI to  see what had happened. Okay, here's what happened. All the discs showed anterior dis -  placement without reduction before treatment. Okay? Makes sense. Only 10% of the joints  became anterior displacement with reduction after treatment. Said another way, 90% of  the patients got no better. 90% of the patients that were off the disc before treatment were  still off the disc after treatment. Okay, discs treated by arthroscopic surgery were located  09/01/25   Page   of 1   12

SSC 2.0 - 318: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 2  more anteriorly compared with pretreatment. That's not cool. So the disc was further dis -  placed after arthroscopic surgery.  [0:02:55]  The disc deformity advanced after arthrocentesis and arthroscopic surgery. The disc was  pushed farther out of place and more deformed. Then the splint therapy group and the  pumping manipulation group. Okay, so bottom line, arthroscopic surgery and arthrocente -  sis made these people worse, not better. However, because the disc was farther pushed  out of place and more deformed, I'll bet you 50 bucks that the patients who had those  thought they were better 'cause they would be able to open bigger. There's only 10% of  these patients that actually were on the disc and would have had full opening. The 90% all  could open, they couldn't open normal 'cause they weren't on the disc, but there would  have been varying degrees and these ones that were actually worse on MRI may have  thought they were better because their range of motion would have been better and the  dentist treating them would have thought, now, the oral surgeons probably wouldn't have. I  think the oral surgeons would have known that they were still off the disc.  Another Study   [0:04:02]  All right, another one. This was 28 patients with unilateral non-reducing disc displacement,  bilateral MRI was immediately performed preoperatively and then two months later. So this  is another arthrocentesis group here. So the findings, the comparison of the pretreatment  MRI with the two-month follow-up showed that here again, roughly 10% became disc dis -  placement with reduction. So 90% were still just as bad off as they were before, 10% did  get on the disc.  2025 Case Report   [0:04:38]  Here is a case report published in 2025, so we'll get some more current or more recent  data here. I love this case report. Okay? So case report is obviously a patient and we're  gonna go through this together 'cause there's a lot to learn here. Now, this was obviously  published, so you can go, you can go   in our document center and find the full text in here,  but I'm gonna put a lot in here rather than just the conclusion 'cause this is educational, as  you'll see. So go ahead, and I don't normally read the slides to you, but I'm gonna read this  out loud so I can kind of make comments on this. Arthrocentesis, joint lavage and lysis,  and hydraulic distention of the temporomandibular joint have been described as effective  options for reducing joint pain and improving function in patients with liminal mouth open -  ing, closed lock, due to disc displacement without reduction, fundamentally in the acute  phase of the disorder.  [0:05:31]  09/01/25   Page   of 2   12

SSC 2.0 - 318: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 2  Despite controversy, some studies suggest that in addition to improving the range of open -  ing and reducing joint pain, the disc can also be reduced in some cases. That's kind of an  interesting starting off point here, right? So they're saying that if you flush out the joint, that  pretty much in agreement that it can help people open bigger and have less pain, and it's  apparently controversial to consider that we could get people back on the disc. Okay? So,  all right, so there you go. So that's kind of where they're coming at from.  [0:06:01]  All right. So here we have a 34-year-old woman presented with a six-week history of joint  pain due to disc displacement without reduction of the right TMJ. The clinical manifestation  consisted of moderately reduced mouth opening, 30 millimeters, with deflection towards  the effective side. Now, I talked about this in level one, but let me remind you, deflection  goes to one side and stays there. Deviation goes to the side and comes back to the cen -  ter. So deviation is consistent with reducing disc displacement. We move to the side...  Back to the middle. Deflection is disc displacement without reduction, staying off to one  side. Okay?  [0:06:40]  And six weeks, so like I said, time is of the essence. Six weeks, we should have a pretty  good chance of getting this person on the disc. Okay, this is a... This is   right there, we're  good to go. Six weeks, I'd be pretty darn confident we're gonna get this person back on the  disc. Also, 34 years old, she's young. Okay, this is gonna be a home run. All right, MRI  scan confirmed the diagnosis. Awesome, good job, guys. Well, we know that the disc is  actually out of place, showing anterior medial displacement of the joint disc with the mouth  closed and no reduction at maximum mouth opening. Okay, so there we go. This condition  had been preceded in late 2019 by disc displacement with reduction, popping and clicking,  and associated with intense clicking sounds. Disc reduction through joint distraction, man -  ual manipulation proved unsuccessful. All right, so this is classic case. She's popping and  clicking, and then she's all of a sudden not popping and clicking, and they tried to manipu -  late her jaw, and that did not work 'cause it almost never works.  [0:07:47]  Aside on that, I used to teach classes with a physical therapist that worked with me in my  Boise practice, and one time we were teaching a group of dentists together, and he was  talking about manipulation of the jaw, and I asked him in front of everybody, probably inap -  propriate of me to ask him a question that I didn't know the answer to in front of everybody,  but I did, and I'm like, hey, how many people have you unlocked by manual manipulation?  And he said to me knowingly, and oh, by the way, this physical therapist, who's amazing,  had treated people for at least 10, maybe 15 years before I came around. So he was well,  lots of experience. So I said, "How many people have you unlocked with just your hands?"  And he's like, "Knowingly?" And I'm like, "Well, yeah, knowingly." And he's like, "None."  Okay, this guy had probably attempted to unlock hundreds of people at this point, maybe  more, and he'd never popped anyone on the disc. Okay, so manual manipulation, rarely  successful. You could try, I guess, but be really careful. This is the reason why in level one,  09/01/25   Page   of 3   12

SSC 2.0 - 318: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 2  I talk about not sending people who you believe have a non-reducing displacement to a  chiropractor or physical therapist, 'cause they're just gonna push them farther off the disc.  [0:09:12]  All right, so, and that we can kind of read into this a little bit here too. They tried this manu -  al manipulation. I don't know how many times they tried, but she opens 30. What did I  teach you as the kind of normal number for a non-reducing displacement? How wide? Do  you remember that number? 26, does that ring a bell? So about 26, 27 millimeters, 25, 27,  right around there, that's gonna be how far they opened. 30 is a little wide, actually. Well,  that makes sense if we know that someone tried to jack her open, okay? They kind of push  this out a little bit. Even with that, I would still be very confident going into this case. All  right, so there is her opening. So right around there, 31 millimeters, and she deflects, so  you can kind of see that her jaw... So there's the upper teeth and there's a canine, da, da,  da. So there's the midline. The midline is like right in line with the ruler there. So she is de -  flected off to the right side. So this labeled B is a representation of what's going on with the  MRI. That's not actually from her film.  [0:10:19]  That's just a representation of it. And then here's the actual MRI. So we see that disc  curled up in front. Condyle looks gorgeous. Fossa looks gorgeous. Everything's great. We  don't have any arthritic changes here, nothing. We've just got the nice, actually fat disc, the  way it's supposed to be. Fat, skinny fat. That's what the disc, that's what we want it to look  like. And it's out, pushed out in front. That's beautiful. So if I saw this and saw the round  condyle and everything else, I'd be like, we got this. They've only been locked for six  weeks. The disc looks great on the MRI. This is a super duper duper easy case. All right,  so now what do they do? So they take her in to the OR basically. Look, they got all the  sterile draping and stuff. And they got the bin there 'cause they're gonna flush a bunch of  water through her joints and all that stuff. And they're going to flush through with arthrocen -  tesis. And note that they've got the needles there showing on this rendering here that  they're in the superior joint space. Now, I think ideally you would try to be in the inferior  joint space, but whatever. They are showing that in the superior joint space. And let's then  see what happens. So here's the final situation. It says, disc displacement without reduc -  tion and with no limited opening of the mouth of the patient. Okay. Did you catch that?  [0:11:47]  So disc displacement without reduction, as in the disc is still out of place. So here's our lit -  tle drawing. Here it is here. It's less out of place, but still out of place. They did not get the  condyle back on the disc. And then this part bothers me. So the disc displacement without  reduction. Okay, good. Good job that you guys knew what that was. No limited opening.  Okay? A, correct opening reaching 40 millimeters. Is that correct opening? Heck no. So 48  to 52 or three fingers. There's no way that that is full opening for that patient, which we  know for sure because they included the MRI to show us that she's not on the disc. To  show that that condyle is nowhere close to the apex of the articular eminence. So this  study cracks me up because this is a failure. But they don't go into the case report saying  it's a failure 'cause they're like, hey, look, right on. We got her full range of motion again.  09/01/25   Page   of 4   12

SSC 2.0 - 318: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 2  Now, I don't think you did. Okay? And here they've held the ruler off to the side. But there's  the upper teeth clearly. And if you kind of extrapolate here, she's still deflected. She's still  deflected to the right. Not a lot, but she's still deflected. Okay. We know that this is off.  Conclusion   [0:13:10]  Conclusions. Joint disc reduction in closed lock is possible in some cases if treatment is  applied early, but is not essential for the management of these patients since arthrocente -  sis allows disc mobilization and deformation impelled by the mandibular condyle with reso -  lution of the limitation of mouth opening. The main objective of arthrocentesis should be to  eliminate the pain as soon as possible in order to allow mobility of the mandible and with it  that of the joint disc. I disagree. The goal of this is not just to increase range of motion. The  goal of this is to get them back on the disc, to get them back as reducing disc displace -  ment because everything was fine until she spends all of her time off the disc and that's  when we can then start having more inflammatory processes start and that is where de -  generative arthritis comes from. That's where pain comes from. So I completely disagree  with the author's conclusion here that it's like, ah, oh well, we got her opening bigger. Now,  having said that, you are going to have patients you do not get back on the disc. As of  now, what do you think you would add to make it less likely for them to have arthritic  breakdown down the road? What would you add? What would you do now after you  know   you haven't gotten them back on the disc? Three letters. That's right, PRF. If you add  PRF to a chronic non-reducing disc displacement, you cannot get them back on the disc.  [0:14:51]  You're gonna give them at least a fighting chance to create what has been called in the  past a pseudo-disc or just to toughen up those retrodiscal tissues so they don't break  down. So now, in the past, we've not done that. In the past, we've treated them off the disc  knowingly and we've given them a splint to make it so they can't put so much pressure on  their retrodiscal tissues. But now, if this was a family member, if this was a patient, I would  offer them the best treatment possible, of course, and that would be now we're gonna do a  night guard for sure and PRF and we're gonna do PRF on a regular basis, like annually, to  make sure those tissues don't break down further.  Meta-analysis   [0:15:27]  Now, let's look at another study that's a couple of years older, but it's a meta-analysis. So  they looked at a bunch of different studies. What they looked at in this study was, or this  meta-analysis was, efficacy of arthrocentesis compared to splint therapy. So the more in -  vasive arthrocentesis procedure compared to non-invasive splint therapy and let's see  what happened. So what they did, as with any meta-analysis, they looked through the lit -  09/01/25   Page   of 5   12

SSC 2.0 - 318: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 2  erature and found studies that they were going to include and then what did they find. So  in the results says a total of five studies was included in the review. Three studies showed  greater improvement of symptoms with arthrocentesis in terms of maximum opening. Let's  see what they cared about. Maximum opening, pain, Visual Analog Scale, value.   Two oth -  er studies found no significant advantage of arthrocentesis over the other treatment proto -  col. Okay, so three of five. Yeah, that's better, can open bigger, less pain. Two of the five  studies didn't seem better at all. The meta-analysis resulted in statistically significant dif -  ference between outcome variables favoring arthrocentesis group versus of course, the  splint therapy group.  Conclusion   [0:16:39]  Conclusion. Arthrocentesis showed effective results in terms of increase in mouth opening  and reduction of pain level compared to stabilization splint and other non-invasive ap -  proaches. Okay? So overall this supports use of arthrocentesis and displacement without  reduction. Now, once again, if our goal was increased range of motion and decreased  pain, and that's all we care about, then I would not disagree with that. But I would add PRF  in these cases because assuredly some of these patients, if they're putting any pressure  on, if they are clenching or grinding, or if they do in the future, and remember, that disc is  out of place all the time now. So even every time they yawn, they're traumatizing that tis -  sue. I would definitely add PRF.  Randomized Controlled Trial   [0:17:29]  Okay, another one. So this is double puncture versus single puncture arthrocentesis. And  so either one hole and just pumping, putting fluid in there or the flushing it out. Check that  out. Compare to the two to see what was happening with the disc displacement without  reduction. Followed up after three years. So here's what they did, Group one was the con -  ventional double puncture arthrocentesis like we've talked about. Group two was the single  puncture type of arthrocentesis.  [0:17:57]  And you can read here the things that they were looking at with range of motion and Visual  Analog Scale, pain reports, stuff like that. After three years, what did they find? 23 patients  completed the study. Both techniques resulted in significantly reduced Visual Analog  Scale, scores of pain and increased range of motion. Awesome.  Conclusion   [0:18:18]  09/01/25   Page   of 6   12

SSC 2.0 - 318: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 2  Conclusions. Considering the objectives, results and limitations, the present study can be  concluded, the conventional double puncture and single puncture arthrocentesis were  equally effective in reducing pain and increasing opening in patients with disc displace -  ment without reduction. Both showed good results after three years of follow up. Okay,  what did they not look at? If the patient was on the disc or not. Were they on the disc? Al -  most assuredly not. Why not? Because there was no stabilization afterwards. Because  there wasn't even the goal of treatment. So that is the thing you need to know here, is the  goal of arthrocentesis and the goal in the literature, is to reduce pain and increase range of  motion. It is not to get the disc back into place.  Our Goal!   [0:19:03]  [video playback]  Okay? So our goal is on the other hand to get the disc into place. So we would love to get  people normal if possible.   But remember we're trying to get them reducing displacement  so off the disc and then they open and they go pop and they spend time on the disc. And  some people will spend a lot of time on the disc 'cause it's only when their teeth go togeth -  er, squirt, that the disc goes out of place. So the closer they are to 1% occlusion, that  could actually mean that only 1% of the time are they off the disc. Does that make sense?  So they're off the disc now, but if they were to open and then keep their jaw from going all  the way back into occlusion, they would be on the disc so they could open, pop, go about  their day. And it's only when their teeth come together that they are off of that disc. The  person going from reducing disc displacement, you see the condyle all the way up there to  non-reducing disc displacement, condyle still all the way up there, there's no difference in  their bite. There is a difference if we go reducing displacement to normal. But our fear here  is if we do not get that disc back into place, then ultimately they could break through that  tissue and then we have degenerative joint disease.  [0:20:18]  We have a bone on bone type of situation there. Okay? This person did not. This person  went to their grave with a non-reducing displacement and they did fine. Were they a 1%  occluder? Maybe. Did they have other stuff going on that helped them not blow through  that tissue? Maybe. This person on the other hand was not so lucky. So our goal with this  is to go from non-reducing disc displacement to reducing disc displacement. If it doesn't  click, it's not reducing. If it doesn't click, it's not reducing. That is the last of the most impor -  tant points that I'll give you here because I have people all the time, well, I did this and I  did that and I did this and they're opening bigger and I will say, does it click? No, they don't  click. Then they're not on the disc. Does that make sense? If they can put their teeth to -  gether and open without clicking, they have a non-reducing disc displacement in this sce -  nario. Okay, Obviously not everybody who can open wide has a non-reducing displace -  ment. So my point there is, if you have a patient that had a reducing disc displacement in  09/01/25   Page   of 7   12

SSC 2.0 - 318: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 2  the past and now you've done whatever you've done and they can open bigger and maybe  it doesn't even hurt, but they don't click, they have a non-reducing disc displacement.  [0:21:47]  It is impossible for them to go from non-reducing disc displacement back to normal without  there being a bite change. So if they had a reducing disc displacement at one point, they  popped and clicked, then they went to non-reducing. Your goal is to get them back to re -  ducing, not normal, reducing. And that could be a stepping stone to get them more to -  wards normal if it makes sense.  [0:22:18]  That's in the session on advanced TMD on splint therapy. Why do we do that? PDQ, pain  dysfunction quality of life issues. When somebody comes in with a non-reducing disc dis -  placement, when somebody comes in acutely locked, there is one goal, to take them from  locked to not locked. To take them from non-reducing disc displacement to reducing disc  displacement. That's it. That's the goal. That's the whole thing. Depending on what hap -  pens there, then we will go to the next level, which sometimes is just keeping them from  locking again. That's all they care about. They're doing fine. They don't have pain dysfunc -  tion quality of life issues as long as they're clicking. It was only when they stopped clicking,  when they went from reducing displacement to non-reducing displacement, that they start -  ed to have PDQ.  [0:23:07]  So we just get them back to reducing. On the other hand, now that you've had them back  on the disc for a little bit and now they're popping and clicking a bit, maybe they realize,  you know, actually boy, when I was in that temporary splint and stuff like that, my jaw was  in that right spot all the time. I had less headaches and I was feeling better and my jaw  wasn't fatigued all the time. And I swear I could eat better even though I had that weird  thing in my mouth. Okay, well that might be someone that we treat to try to get them to -  wards centric relation. I hope that clearly makes sense to you and I hope that that rein -  forces to you why we need you to do this. Because our other colleagues, our surgeons  that are doing the arthrocentesis, it is not in their literature, they are not taught that it's  about getting the patient back on the disc. They are taught actually that it's not about that.  It's about decreased pain, usually via steroids and increased range of motion. And I would  posit that if we decrease the pain with the steroids which is not doing anything to heal it,  it's just doing it... Doing something to reduce the inflammation temporarily.  [0:24:24]  And then we increase our range of motion, usually through physical therapy, because  that's how it works too. So typically, they do the arthrocentesis, and in our town, they used  to... The surgeons would send directly to that physical therapist I was talking about. The  patient would have arthrocentesis, and they would literally drive directly to the physical  therapist for that physical therapist to manipulate their jaw and push all that out of the way.  Does that make sense to you to do it that way, if you had better options? I certainly hope it  doesn't. And then we got to do the temporary splint, because I'll bet you that lots of pa -  tients that have arthrocentesis do get back on the disc. Almost every oral surgeon I've ever  09/01/25   Page   of 8   12

SSC 2.0 - 318: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 2  talked to who does arthrocentesis, and I'll say, hey, so you've done the fleshing out. You  manipulate the jaw. How often do you get people popping and clicking again? They're like,  oh, my gosh. Yeah, almost all the time. Like, almost always. Right. Of course they do.  Right? The patient's sedated, they've flushed out their joint really well, and then they get to  jack on their jaw as hard as they want.  [0:25:28]  They're gonna pop them on the disc, like, a lot of the time. But what don't they do? This.  They don't do a temporary splint. So then the patient is back off the disc as soon as their  teeth come together, 'cause they have to be. Okay? Their teeth can't be together and have  the disc in place. There's no room. So as soon as they swallow, I'm off. If they send them  to the physical therapist, they've probably been off more than they're on during the car  ride. And now the physical therapist Jacks their jaw, and if they're not off then, they're for  sure gonna be off in the next couple of days when they just go about back to their normal  activities of daily living. So we need you. We need you to do this.  Unlocking Keys to Success   [0:26:15]  So here are your unlocking keys to success. Accurate diagnosis, always best to get the  MRI. I've done it without, I have done it without. I don't like to do it without because I'm not  positive. And use that line, before I stick a needle in the side of your head, I'd like to be  100% sure that your disc is out of place.  [0:26:42]  You can say things like, yeah, my mentor and I, we had a case where we thought the pa -  tient was locked and we got the MRI and she wasn't, and we didn't end up doing the un -  locking procedure. Okay? I've had many of those cases. They're not always locked. Some -  times they aren't locked. Oh, and by the way, and this is back in level one, you're gonna  look at the MRI yourself. You cannot trust the radiologist reading 'cause the radiologist got  as much education on TMJ as you did. Okay? He got as much, or she got as much in their  radiology training on TMJ as you got in dental school on TMJ, which is to say none at all.  Okay? So I have taught radiologists how to read these. I have taught them the words we're  gonna use. Okay? I said that in level one, but I went and gave a presentation kind of like  this to a big group of radiologists once. And at the end, I was like, hey, so, when it's a little  bit out of place, we call that a displacement. And when it's completely out of place, com -  pletely anterior, we call that a dislocation.  [0:27:46]  What do you guys call it? And the head radiologist said, we'll call it whatever you want us  to call it, Jamison. Okay? In other words, we don't know what to call it. What do you want  us to call it? And I gave them the criteria. Okay. Remember, too, this is back in level one,  but let me put it in here too, for your convenience.  09/01/25   Page   of 9   12

SSC 2.0 - 318: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 2  MRI Prescription   [0:28:03]  When you're ordering the MRI, the order is, the prescription for the MRI is, MRI of the bi -  lateral TM joints, closed and wide open views, no contrast, suspect non-reducing disc   dis -  placement of the... And then you say right or left joint or both. Okay? Let me say that  again. MRI of the bilateral TM joints, closed and wide open views, no contrast, suspect  non-reducing disc displacement of the right, left, or both joints. Okay? That's it.  Don’t Give Up!   [0:28:40]  All right. Accurate diagnosis, good technique. Don't give up. Okay? There's one Spencer  Study Club member, and he was in our business elite group. And this dude, I think he had  about 10 cases in a row that he did not get them unlocked. And I've had way more than 10  people not get unlocked, but not in a row, okay?  [0:29:01]  And I told him, I'm like, "Man, you're doing everything right." And I had him like... Like he  did everything. He was like going through everything. He was like, "Okay, you're checking  their bite, right?" "Yeah, their bite's off. And, I'm visually checking that their bite's off. And  they're not getting... Their lips' not getting numb. I'm not catching their eye. I know that I'm  in the right spot, but I'm just not getting them unlocked." And he stuck with it. And he was  very discouraged. Okay, you would be, too, if you had that many unsuccessful cases in a  row. But there's something about social proof, right? So you believe me that this works.  And now you're a member of Spencer Study Club, so you don't just have to believe me.  You know that there's hundreds of other people that are doing this stuff and it works. So  when it doesn't work for you, you kind of got to be like, well, is it me? Yeah, it is. You're just  not that good yet. So get better. And the only way you're gonna get better is by doing it.  Okay? So you're gonna suck, and then over time, you're gonna suck less, and eventually  you'll be pretty good.  [0:30:04]  But don't give up, okay? Your patients deserve you to not give up. Now, it's nice if it's a re -  ducible disc, so maybe harder. Not maybe, it's gonna be harder if the patient's been off the  disc for 20 years. So look for those cases like that case study where the patient was off for  six weeks. That was perfect. And with that MRI and everything, that's a great case. Now, if  they've been off longer, a year, a year and a half or whatever, still try, still worth it to get  your reps in. But if you don't get them back on the disc, then you might punt and have  them come to someone that has more reps than you so that they're more likely to be suc -  cessful just because they're more experienced at it, they're better at it. And we've had  people fly from all over the country to our practices to have treatment even after others  have tried to do treatment on them because of our experience level.  09/01/25   Page   of 10   12

SSC 2.0 - 318: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 2  Immediate Treatment   [0:30:58]  Okay, immediate treatment to stabilize the reduced disc. So we got to have that chairside  temporary splint. That is not negotiable either. If we don't do the temporary splint, they're  gonna pop off, as I mentioned before, but is nowhere in my slides here. If they lock the  next morning, and that happens more than once, I would for sure put them in a sleep type  of an appliance.  [0:31:20]  Another good one for this, 'cause you could have it like right there and just do it immedi -  ately, would be a myTAP. And if you said, hey Jamison, actually I love the idea of using a  myTAP 'cause I can fit it faster than I can do a temporary splint. That temporary splint with  pushing on the hand with your fingers and cutting it with the scissors and smoothing it out  and all that stuff, that's for the birds. I'll just fit a temporary myTAP appliance and we're  good to go, you know, and the patient can just use that. True. But the other thing we kind  of need there is we need them to have something during the day too. So that'd be a little  awkward for the patient to wear that myTAP all through the day. They're not gonna like that  as much. So believe me, I've tried to get away from the temporary splint or whatever. Tried  to figure out some other way to do that. Not figured it out yet.  [0:32:15]  f you come up with an idea, let me know, I'm all ears. But you're gonna make that tempo -  rary splint. Nevertheless, you might decide, you know what, I'm gonna do the lower the  mandibular temporary splint, so that's something to wear during the day. But I'm also  gonna give them a myTAP, to keep their jaw from falling backwards at night. So I know that  they're gonna stay on the disc at night. Awesome. Good for you. Okay, again, as I men -  tioned, the only reason we don't do that, it's just more expense. Okay? The myTAPs are  150 bucks or whatever they are and so we'd have to charge the patient more to cover that.  And so we don't. But if you wanted to do that, I would totally support you doing that.  Lastly, Follow up!   [0:32:48]  Then lastly, follow up with appropriate long term care. PRF for the win. Remember, non-  reducing to reducing. So if we could put some good juice in there, some PRF and cause  some healing to occur, we are making it less likely for them to go non-reducing again. And  if we can't get them back on the disc, then for sure do PRF because you want to help heal  those retrodiscal tissues as much as you can to keep them from breaking down.  [0:33:23]  And then I would encourage that patient to do that at least annually 'cause at this point,  you know you're treating them off the disc. So that would for sure be a nighttime appliance,  09/01/25   Page   of 11   12

SSC 2.0 - 318: Unlocking the Non Reducing Disc Part 2  a ferro style night guard, an airway friendly night guard. So with a little ramp thingy or a  sleep appliance, either one is fine, and PRF. And I would do that on a regular basis. Okay,  that is it. That is unlocking the non-reducing disc. I hope that you really take this to heart. If  you need to watch this two or three times, watch it two or three times. But I need you doing  this. Okay? Once you figure out how to do this and you do it successfully, you will be in the  top one 100th of 1% of dentists on planet Earth. I would be shocked to find out if there's  more than a 1000 people on planet Earth that know how to do this, what I just described.  Now, I've taught lots of people how to do this, taught it like this in lectures, and you may  have seen me do that before at a big dental meeting or something. I show people unlock -  ing procedures.  [0:34:33]  You know why? Okay, I don't show people unlocking procedures at the Hinman or at  Chicago Midwinter or at CDA or Greater New York or stuff like that, 'cause I think they're  gonna go out and do it, I show them so they know it can be done. And then sometimes  those patients get sent to me and people like you who I know can do it. That's why I show  it. I show PRF everywhere I lecture now. Not because I think that the dentist is gonna go  and do PRF. I do it because I think the dentist is gonna be like, oh, there's something that  can be done for this person. I should have them reach out to Jamison and Jamison can  get them somewhere where they can get help. You're the place where they get the help. If  not you, who?  [0:35:17]  If you're not gonna learn this now, when? You can do this, we'll help you. We got your  back. You can do this. And it's going to massively change your patient's life when you do  this. And I promise you that first time that you unlock somebody, and you're like, oh, my  gosh, that was exactly how he said it was gonna be. That's... It went exactly as planned.  You're gonna feel pretty awesome. But if you're like that one dentist and 10 in a row, it  doesn't work out like that, just keep plodding along, keep doing it. That guy who I was talk -  ing about, he now teaches other people how to do this because he's so confident about it.  But he had to get through the sucky part before he could suck less. And now he's actually  awesome. Okay, you're gonna do that too. All right. Take care.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 12   12

