SSC 2.0 - 507: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 3  SSC 2.0   Level 5  507: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 3  [intro music]  Alcohol   [0:00:12]  Now let's move on to the second most popular drug in the world, alcohol. Here are some  points from a few different studies, and this isn't really kind of cherry picking or anything,  but just a representation of the body of literature on this. Alcohol will reduce sleep onset  latency and reduce the time to the first occurrence of deep sleep, poor sleep quality in  general, snoring and short sleep duration, worsens snoring and obstructive sleep apnea.  Alcohol before bed leads to wakenings or wakings and overall low quality sleep, intense  REM sleep, REM rebound, breathing disorders, parasomnias, and fatigue in the morning.  So alcohol can increase REM and REM rebound, having more REM. And of course, REM  sleep, as you know, is associated with worsening sleep apnea because of the muscle re -  laxation that occurs in REM sleep.  Alcohol Study   [0:01:10]  This 2024 study published in Alcohol and Alcoholism makes the case that reducing alcohol  consumption, not taking those who abstain completely from alcohol into the equation, but  those who reduce their use of alcohol, improves sleep overall. And then, of course, using  alcohol with any of the other medications that we've talked about will accentuate the nega -  tive side effects of those medications. And it would be, once again, relatively rare for  someone who is drinking before bed to not be on any medications in your patient base.  [0:01:51]  Could happen. And also, similar to caffeine, there's going to be different tolerance levels  and different things like that. But in general, it's been found that for most people, alcohol  consumption does seem to degrade sleep. And this is a problem because the person will  often use alcohol to medicate themselves to go to sleep. So this is a way that they wind  down. This is a way that they relax and part of their kind of nighttime regimen in doing so.  We need to treat the N-of-1, as I've always said, so that could be something that you could  talk to a patient about if they're not getting better. All of this stuff that we're going through  right now is, remember, we're getting into the deep into sleep stuff because our patient is  responding to oral appliance therapy. Their airway is protected. We've done our job, as it  09/01/25   Page   of 1   11

SSC 2.0 - 507: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 3  were, but they're still not feeling better. So we're diving into some of these deeper areas to  help us sleuth out what the problem might be. This could be one of those problems.  Smoking   [0:02:58]  Moving to the next most popular drug, not as much anymore in the United States, but still  pretty darn popular in the United States, particularly with medical people. Have you ever  noticed that? Have you ever driven by a hospital or a big medical clinic and you see a  bunch of people in scrubs out smoking? I always find that curious. Probably you do too. So  smoking has been shown to exacerbate obstructive sleep apnea and decrease deep sleep  and therefore decreasing restful sleep. Now the reason for the obstructive sleep apnea is  the irritation of the oropharyngeal airway. It just makes sense that if there is any inflamma -  tion of that airway, that inflammation is going to cause a swelling of those tissues, if you  will. Swollen tissues are going to be more likely to collapse just because the area is small -  er. This is good because if somebody does stop smoking, that irritation will go away. The  inflammation will go away and that may result in their sleep apnea getting better. Now  since smoking is a stimulant, when people give up smoking, that will result in less irritation  of their airway, which theoretically could reduce their sleep apnea. But at the same time,  because they're not taking in that stimulant, usually multiple times a day anymore, then  they will tend to gain weight because the stimulant has an effect on their metabolism and  things like that.  [0:04:29]  Of course, well known in pop culture that when people give up smoking, they tend to gain  weight. And a lot of people smoke thinking that they are controlling their weight with the  use of that stimulant. And again, those things do have correlations. Just keep in mind, now  it's relatively rare in my experience that we treat a lot of smokers. Theory on that, and this  is clearly not down to our N-of-1, this is just kind of speaking in large terms and in popula -  tions, but people who smoke in general don't care as much about their health as people  who don't smoke. Obviously, there's exceptions to those rules. I mentioned a second ago,  that's why it's weird to me that you'll go by a hospital and there'll be a bunch of people in  scrubs out smoking. Theoretically, they would care about their health since they are in  health care, but not everyone is. In our practice, as I've made the point in other areas of  Spencer Study Club, our patients by definition care about their health or they wouldn't be  in our offices. So you as a general dentist, a restorative dentist, your patients care about  their health unless you're treating a bunch of emergency people, which you probably  aren't.  [0:05:47]  People who go to the dentist in general care about their health. Well, what about practices  like mine that are limited and my patients are referred in from sleep doctors and whatnot?  Well, once again, if they're referred by sleep doctors, they probably tried CPAP first. A  09/01/25   Page   of 2   11

SSC 2.0 - 507: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 3  huge percentage of our patients try CPAP first, even in 2025. So pre-pandemic, it was  dang near everybody tried CPAP first. Now there's significantly more patients that will be  referred directly to oral appliance therapy because the reason I bring up the pandemic is  the doctors got more confident with oral appliance therapy during the pandemic when they  couldn't get CPAP machines and they were sending people for oral appliance therapy and  they were like, "Oh, well, these things work maybe better than I thought they did." So  we've seen in our practices a big effect of that, a long-term effect of that, of sleep doctors  being far more comfortable nowadays with mild to moderate patients going directly to oral  appliance therapy. Severs, they still want to try CPAP first. The CPAP intolerant people  don't come to you unless they care about their health.  [0:06:58]  They just don't. That's going to skew towards non-smokers. That's the way it is. So you will  probably, like in my practice, you're going to see less smokers, nevertheless, must cover  smoking's effect on sleep and put this into the category of all the other stimulants like caf -  feine that we've already talked about because it's going to have similar negative effects.  Corticosteroids   [0:07:21]  What about corticosteroids? Unfortunately, a lot of people are put on corticosteroids and  those can impact sleep as well. So they tend to disrupt the sleep-wake cycle, may cause  insomnia in some patients, reduce sleep quality overall, and other sleep-related issues. So  these are your rock and a hard place. The people are on the corticosteroids for a reason,  obviously, and then they're going to have disrupted sleep. Now, thankfully, a lot of people  are put on steroids for a relatively short period. Unfortunately, some people with immune  disorders and whatnot are put on steroids long-term. If the steroids do seem to affect their  sleep, that would be a time to have a conversation with the prescribing doctor, talk to them  about that, see if there are any alternatives. There may not be, and you may just have to  really lean on everything else that you can do because they have to be on those medica -  tions based on what their doctor's treating them for.  Antidepressants   [0:08:18]  Antidepressants can be a little bit confusing because some seem to improve certain as -  pects of sleep and others make sleep worse. So once again, we kind of need to have a big  old graphic here to go through some of these different medications. We talked about ben -  zodiazepines and the non-benzodiazepines and some of those medications earlier, but  you can see on this graph, and I'll just kind of pause so you to go through this. Again, this  is another one that you might want to take a screen capture of and see. So down here to  our legend for this image, REM, obviously Rapid Eye Movement, ROL, Rapid Eye Move -  09/01/25   Page   of 3   11

SSC 2.0 - 507: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 3  ment Onset latency, so REM latency. Remember that first REM cycle is typically going to  be about 90 minutes into sleep, so this is going to this one they're looking at. Does that af -  fect the REM latency, make it shorter, so they're hitting REM cycles faster than normal, or  does it make it longer? SWS, slow-wave sleep, or deep sleep, stage 3 sleep. TCA, tricyclic  antidepressants; TECA, tetracyclic antidepressants; monoamine oxidase inhibitors,  MAOIs; SSRIs you know already, SNRIs; DNRI, dopamine-norepinephrine reuptake in -  hibitor; SARI, serotonin antagonists and reuptake inhibitors; DARI, dopamine reuptake in -  hibitors, and NARI, noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors, and of course up arrow is increase,  down arrow is decrease, and zero is no or minimal effect.  [0:09:56]  So you can go through each of these classification of so-called antidepressants, and with  different names here, then see what that effect is on their REM sleep, their REM latency,  their slow-wave sleep, and just their continuity of sleep in general. Now notice, so on, let's  take that first one there of amitriptyline, decreases REM, increases latency, meaning it is  longer for the patient to go into REM, increases deep sleep, increases continuity of sleep.  Now, a doctor, or you might discuss this with the primary care doctor, that means you  might use medications for hopefully a short period of time to try to increase deep sleep.  Now notice on most of these medications, so that the amitriptyline is maybe no effect on  REM or a little bit up. In the TCA category, clomipramine is three arrows down on REM  sleep, so basically wipes out REM sleep. Also takes out deep sleep, but just only one ar -  row down in that case. That's bad all the way around. Also decreases sleep continuity.  That's a tough one, right?  [0:11:09]  That's a tough one on sleep. So as we go down through REM here, we have the only one  is here in the TCAs that has either no effect or a little bit up. And then down here we have  another drug, nefazodone, that is no effect or a little bit up. Another one, a little up, but  most are down. Most of the antidepressants are going to decrease REM, some massively  decreasing REM. You see a lot of up arrows in the latency. Remember, up is bad in this  case. It is making it so that they don't hit REM until farther on in the night. Now, the deep  sleep is interesting because you see a lot of up arrows here. You only see singular arrows,  so it is increasing deep sleep a little, but little is better than nothing, I imagine. So you ei -  ther got no effect or a little bit up. You've got only one there that has a little bit down. And  then the sleep continuity, we've got a mixed bag there of ups and downs. Once again,  maybe take a screen capture of this, print it out, have that someplace so that when you  are talking to patients about their medications, then you could reference this and be like,  "Okay, so I know you're on an antidepressant, so what antidepressant are you on?"  [0:12:25]  And you could find which class and what that is likely to do with their sleep. I can virtually  guarantee you that whatever doctor put them on the antidepressant never did this. And  when they ask them questions like, "How are you sleeping?" Again, note that the sleep  continuity is kind of a mixed bag here. The deep sleep is more or less positive with some  exceptions there, so it would depend on what the person's sleep was like before and how  09/01/25   Page   of 4   11

SSC 2.0 - 507: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 3  they're going to respond to that question because they're not asking them objectively.  They're not doing a sleep study, putting them on an antidepressant, doing another sleep  study. And remember, too, that a lot of the people that are put on antidepressants are  women and that they are not thinking about sleep apnea. They're not even considering a  sleep disorder at all because they're not a fat old man, so this can all get really, really kind  of screwed up.  Hypertension Medications   [0:13:22]  Here's a summary of hypertension medications and what impact they may have on sleep.  So our beta blockers reduce natural levels of melatonin. Some beta blockers can cause  nightmares. Many beta blockers have been shown to reduce sleep quality overall. Some  are linked to nightmares, insomnia, daytime sleepiness due to the lack of sleep, obviously,  and some may also affect REM sleep. You're going to have a lot of patients on beta block -  ers, and again, well-known disruption of sleep a little bit over the board here, all over the  board here. In general, negative, how that's affecting that individual will depend on that in -  dividual.  [0:14:01]  Diuretics, no huge surprise here, but can increase urination, so the person has to get up  more times during the night. That's going to disrupt their sleep. And then lastly, cate -  cholamine depleting has impact on REM, slow-wave sleep, nightmares, insomnia, mood  swings, depression, all sorts of stuff. This just sucks so hard, right? Because we have  people with heart disease, with hypertension. This is one of the reasons that if you talk to  most cardiologists that are in the know, they're going to do sleep studies on their patients.  They're not sleeping well in the first place, and I think this is why a lot of cardiologists don't  really lean more on evaluating people for obstructive sleep apnea, is they recognize that a  lot of their patients have poor sleep. And then they also know that medications they're  putting their patients on can further degrade sleep quality, and I guess they're just not  thinking about the anatomical aspect.  [0:15:01]  One would think they would, because the nice thing about obstructive sleep apnea is its  anatomy, and if we can affect that anatomy, we can basically get rid of the problem. And  then maybe some of these other negative side effects of the medications wouldn't be quite  so bad.  Decongestants   [0:15:20]  Decongestants, this is kind of the opposite of our antihistamines. So decongestants are  stimulants, and these will often be in similar medications. So if you have a Tylenol Severe  09/01/25   Page   of 5   11

SSC 2.0 - 507: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 3  Sinus, and then maybe a Tylenol Sinus PM, they're going to decrease some of the decon -  gestion a little bit. They're going to then kind of play around with the levels there of antihis -  tamine and decongestants. So to make it a little bit easier for you to sleep because the de -  congestants in general are stimulants. So we all know about Pseudoephedrine, Sudafed,  and that's in many, many medications. So side effects, obviously just anything related to  the stimulant aspect of that.  Asthma/COPD Medications   [0:16:05]  What about those with asthma or COPD? Well, these are also stimulants that are treated.  So they're going to have the similar effects to other stimulants. So not going through each  of these, but on the side effects, insomnia for the first group there, anxiety, jitter, sleep  problems, last group there, trouble sleeping, nightmares, anxiety, all the same stuff, right?  So we see this over and over again, and this is in that same category as any other stimu -  lants.  Medicinal Cannabis   [0:16:31]  What about medicinal use of cannabis? Now I put medicinal in quotes here because when  I had a practice in Colorado, and this was in the early days of the legalization of marijuana  and stuff like that, and when I was there, I don't think it was quite legal yet, so they still had  to have the card, and it was unbelievable how many patients that I had who were being  treated with medical marijuana for their TMJ problem. And they had zero incentive to get  better. They wanted to make sure that they could still have that medical marijuana. Never -  theless, this is also a medication class that has various impacts on various individuals and  can have positive effects and negative effects. So short-term use of medicinal cannabis  decreases sleep latency, so it makes it quicker to go to sleep, decreased wake after sleep  onset, more continuous sleep, increased total sleep time, decreases Rapid Eye Movement  sleep. So that's the only negative bullet point there is maybe less REM sleep on the short  term. Long-term use and more kind of a chronic use of cannabis could be insomnia, vivid  dreams, disruptive sleep cycle, disruptive REM sleep, and increased risk of sleep distur -  bances when used chronically.  [0:17:53]  Having said that, there are articles that talk about the positives of using cannabis and  cannabinoids and CBD oils and things like that to help people with various things. And this  is something that your patients may experiment with, and again, with everything from like  CBD oils and drops and things like that, to help them with their sleep. That's something  that they could experiment with. In the same token as melatonin, I would encourage peo -  ple not to necessarily chronically do something like that. Now, there could be some studies  09/01/25   Page   of 6   11

SSC 2.0 - 507: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 3  that come out in the future or ones that I'm not aware of right now that say, "Hey, yeah, this  is good for overall sleep architecture." I haven't seen that yet. I haven't heard about that.  Could be. I'm just not familiar with that work. But in general, doing these things like all the  sleep hygiene things that we talk about, that's really your go-to for improving your sleep,  not medications, nutraceuticals, vitamins, things like that. I would put this in that same cat -  egory of maybe short-term help or when traveling or things such as that, then that might be  a good time to try these things and see if they help with your sleep short-term.  [0:19:12]  If you find that you're having to use them all the time to get a good night's sleep, I would  start questioning, well, what else is going on then? If I have to use this same thing over  and over and over again to get a good night's sleep, why is that? Is there something else  wrong?  Other Sedating Drugs   [0:19:23]  And there are a bunch of other drugs that can be sedating. Here's a list. I'll cover some of  these very briefly. Note the last bullet point here, based on TV ads, a lot more. I think it's  darn rare that you've ever seen a drug commercial that didn't talk about potentially being  sleepy or something like that, except for the next class of drugs, which I'll cover after these  drugs. But very, very common for people to be warned of the sedating nature of the med -  ication. And then, of course, always warned that if you combine this with alcohol, that it's  going to be way, way worse. So I'm not familiar with the vast majority of these drugs. I'll  just kind of go through them generally.  [0:20:05]  Chloral hydrate is a sedative, was classified as an anxiolytic. Precedex, if that's how you  say that, is used on putting people to sedate them short term. We have Rozerem or  Ramelteon. I told you, I'm not a drug guy. This is a melatonin receptor agonist. So this is  going to hit those same melatonin receptors and have similar effects of melatonin used for  the treatment of insomnia. Hetlioz is also a similar drug, melatonin receptor agonist. It says  here, approved for the treatment of non-24-hour sleep-wake disorder, chronic circadian  rhythm sleep disorder that primarily affects totally blind individuals, and for nighttime sleep  disturbances.  [0:20:54]  This is interesting to me. You may have seen commercials for this. And I'm sure you're like  me, that you're not like watching commercials all the time. So where I see commercials is  if I travel and I happen to flip on a news channel or whatever, like every dang commercial  is a drug commercial. And it's always surprised me at this one in particular, where it's for  non-24, or it's for patients that are blind. And maybe they know that that's a market, is that  maybe their data shows that blind people are tuned in to news channels, maybe, to get  their news. Not sure.  09/01/25   Page   of 7   11

SSC 2.0 - 507: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 3  [0:21:33]  But I think it's interesting that there's a medication for this, which is great, because, again,  people that are totally blind don't have that same circadian rhythm connection with the sun.  So this is a medication that can help those folks. Here's another kind of old school class of  medications that was replaced by the benzodiazepines and has similar negative effects to  the benzodiazepines. And note, too, on this slide, it mentioning the "muscle relaxant prop -  erties". And that's not a medication or a group of medications that I necessarily went into  depth here. But a lot of muscle relaxants are really just sedatives. And some of those med -  ications, like the benzodiazepines, when we were using these more in our practice, that  were used more for TMJ problems, they were used really as a muscle relaxant. There  aren't medications that actually relax the muscle, whatever that even means. Remember,  muscles are either contracted or relaxed.  [0:22:35]  Remember that all or none thing with motor units. So there is a tone, but that tone is creat -  ed by contraction or non-contraction of the motor units. So really, the so-called muscle re -  laxants are sedatives. So a couple of the herbal sedatives. These are ones that I actually  haven't heard of before, but you're familiar, of course, with like St. John's wort and some of  the other things that people will use to help promote sleep. But all of these different kind of  herbal remedies, these are right along with melatonin. I mean, obviously melatonin is a  hormone, so that is a little bit different. But these are things that your patients can experi -  ment with and that may promote sleep. Once again, I would caution the chronic use. And if  they were to start to find something that helped them, then maybe read up on that specific  thing, see if there's studies on that specific herbal supplement. There probably are. And  then obviously have the patient try to get the highest quality of the herbal supplement that  they can.  Wake-Promoting Medications   [0:23:42]  And what about wake-promoting medications? So this now we kind of swing from things  that make people sleepy to things that make people not sleepy. And these are our am -  phetamines and our stimulants. So here's a list of your amphetamines and amphetamine-  like compounds. And of course, we have our Adderall listed there, so ADHD medication,  Dexedrine used for weight loss by stimulating the metabolism, so to speak, but just making  people more amped up.  [0:24:15]  And then all these other medications there. Other stimulants like Provigil, Nuvigil, these  are often given to people that just are not feeling well during the day. They have excessive  daytime somnolence. Also can be used in people with narcolepsy. Remember, narcolepsy  is somebody who will quickly fall asleep, sometimes not controlled by them at all. But the  09/01/25   Page   of 8   11

SSC 2.0 - 507: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 3  way they test that is they have them take a series of forced naps during the day. And if  they not only go to sleep very quickly, but also go into REM very quickly, that is a sign of  narcolepsy. These people are at danger of accidents, car accidents, things like that, of  course. So they'll be put on stimulants as well. All these stimulants can have negative ef -  fects on their sleep, of course. So these are used judiciously in my experience with the  sleep doctors that I work with. And a little joke here. So amphetamine, that's your Adderall,  stuff like that, can help people focus. Methamphetamine, from Breaking Bad, and then  when you take your Adderall at work. So lots of different people on these stimulants, lots of  different people on all of these medications.  Bottomline   [0:25:23]  So let's now, I gave you the bottom line up front, let me give you the bottom line at the  very end.   If your patient is still sleepy, even though their sleep apnea is better, or in other  words, their AHI is significantly reduced, or their snoring is significantly improved, so we  know the airway is better. We have objective data. The airway is protected. Apneas are  reduced or eliminated. Hypopneas are reduced or eliminated. Snoring is reduced or elimi -  nated. That's all objective anatomy based. But they still don't feel good. This is when we  start jumping down into this rabbit hole of, well, what else could be going on? And I've  mentioned this before. I mentioned this multiple times in Level 4 and talking about building  your practice and getting connections with primary care doctors and stuff like that. Let me  plug that again, please, that this is one of the main reasons that I love you working with  primary care doctors. Even if you have great relationships with the sleep doctors in your  community, still try to build relationships with your primary care doctors. Sleep doctors as  specialists don't tend to do blood tests. They don't tend to do labs. They can, but it's not a  routine thing because the routine is that the primary care doctor has already done all that  stuff.  [0:26:44]  The primary care doctors looked into those things already before they send them for a  sleep study. Sometimes we short-circuit this process. So you, as a dentist, and particularly,  let's say that you came to Spencer Study Club through one of the less-than-maybe-awe -  some ethical people out there that was like, "Hey, you don't really need a doctor involved  or nothing. We'll set you up and we'll hook you up with our dude that's six states away. And  they'll do a home sleep test. We'll mail it to the patient. And they'll sign off on it. And they'll  give you the script for the oral appliance." Okay, did that person ever have labs? Did they  go someplace and pee in a cup? Did they have somebody draw their blood? Did they do  anything like that? Of course not. So it was all just based on the history that a doctor took  over the phone, and usually not even a doctor. Usually it's like a PA or something like that  that's paid specifically for that purpose. If they were to say on every patient, it's like, "You  know what? Boy, before we can move forward, I think we better get some labs.  09/01/25   Page   of 9   11

SSC 2.0 - 507: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 3  [0:27:46]  Better send you off to get a blood test and a urinalysis." They'd get fired. Because the  company would be like, "Hey, you're putting in extra hoops here. That's not necessary. If  they're tired, let's just get a sleep study. That's what we get paid for. Let's do it". It's not  good medicine. That's not how you would want to be treated. It's not how you'd want a  family member to be treated. So when you are doing your job and the patient is still sleepy,  maybe now is the time to dig into what else of the hundreds, if not thousands, if not tens of  thousands of things that could be making them tired, what else is there? Okay? So talk  about their medications with the patient, and then I would consider talking to their PCP or  the sleep doc about those medications. And you're not there to educate those doctors on  that, but just to ask a question, "Hey, doc, I know that certain hypertensive medications  can cause some sleep disorders. I see that this patient's on three of them. They say  they're still tired during the day. Do you think that could have anything to do with  anything?"  [0:28:52]  Hey, I see that this person is on Adderall for their adult ADHD. Do you think that could be  affecting their sleep?" Now, some of those questions are kind of like, "Well, no, duh, they  probably are." But just to open that up and be like, "Hey, are there any options that we  have here?"  Our Job is to Keep the Airway Open   [0:29:10]  Now, remember, our job in this field currently, anyway, is we keep the airway open, right?  The airway is collapsing. Our job is we make something that keeps your throat from falling  backwards. When we're talking about kiddos and stuff, then it's a little bit more involved in  that we're trying to direct growth and development and give them the best airway possible.  But really, our job as dentists currently is more focused on the anatomical nature of this  problem, the anatomical nature of this problem. So while we're doing that, though, it'd be  nice to help them feel better as well. So we don't tend to just leave it at the anatomy. That's  what the companies do that the person buys an oral appliance online, gets sent impres -  sion material in the mail and makes their own, buys it on Amazon. That's what they're do -  ing is they're just focused on anatomy.  [0:30:06]  You're a doctor. You're focused on more than that. But remember, let's don't take our eye  off the prize here. We are going to focus on the anatomy. But as soon as that person is  snoring less, feeling better, those are the two things I have you looking at, right? Snoring  less, feeling better, that means you're ready to send them back to the physician for the  next step. But you have the patient snoring less, not feeling better, that's when we start  looking at more of this stuff.  09/01/25   Page   of 10   11

SSC 2.0 - 507: Sleep & Drugs; Drugs & Sleep Part 3  Treatment Failure?   [0:30:31]  Now, on the other hand, I also don't want you throwing their oral appliance under the bus  all the time and considering it a failure if the person is not sleeping better or doesn't feel  significantly more rested during the day. It could be you're doing your job, the oral appli -  ance is doing its job of keeping the airway patent. That could be completely true. And then  maybe the reason that the person is still tired is maybe medications are on. Maybe it's  smoking. Maybe it's alcohol. Maybe it's caffeine. Maybe it's other stuff that we talked about  in this sleep and drugs section. So the reason for all of this is not that we're going to be  putting people on a bunch of medications, but just to make ourselves aware that there's a  ton of medications that can affect sleep.  [0:31:22]  And there's a bunch that I didn't even go over. So there's definitely more that are out there  that impact sleep and sleep quality. And then to make it even more complicated, all of  these things, when they're used in combination of any nature of these things, any group of  these medications that are then used in combination, which is usually how most are, it's  relatively rare that someone is only on one med. They're usually on multiple meds. Then  you have a combination or a magnification of these negative effects on their sleep. Be  aware of it. Talk to your medical colleagues. They are going to be impressed. If you as a  dentist, which they see you basically as a carpenter, if you contact them and say, "Hey,  pretty sure that the oral appliance is effective. The patient's snoring has gone from here to  here on the snore lab app. Or the patient says that their bed partner now says they really  aren't snoring at all anymore. Their Epworth sleepiness scale, though, it was like 14 when  we started. It's like 12.  [0:32:23]  So this person is still pretty darn tired during the day. I kind of looked at things. They're on  this antihypertensive. They're on this medication for something else. They also said that  it's very common for them to have a nightcap. What do you think could be going on there?  This is kind of more your realm on the medical side of things here. But I just want to talk to  you because, again, we're trying to help this person feel better, sleep better. I think the oral  appliance is doing its job. I'm not sure that it's able to overcome some of these other  things. What do you think?” That's the discussion I would have. Okay. I hope that is helpful  for you. Hope there's some pearls you can take away here for you and your family as well.  And to look at things to help your sleep, help your patients sleep, help everyone that you  come across. And remember, medications are everywhere nowadays. Most medications  are going to have some impact on sleep. Most of those impacts on sleep are usually going  to be negative, not positive. Some can be positive, at least for the short term. All right.  Take care.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 11   11

