SSC 2.0 - 310: Retrodiscitis Part 2  SSC 2.0   Level 3  310: Retrodiscitis Part 2  [intro music]  Retrodiscitis Treatment   [0:00:12]  All right, let's talk about treatment now. So treatment will typically involve anti-inflammato -  ries, physical therapy, use of an Aqualizer or a soft splint, but I'm going to make a case for  the Aqualizer, and then a hard splint if necessary, if it makes sense. So let's go over those  points.  Anti-Inflammatory   [0:00:28]  So with our anti-inflammatories, typically just something like ibuprofen is going to be fine,  600 milligrams every six hours for four to seven days. That's typically what we're going to  use. Now, if it's really bad, and what does really bad mean? Really bad means that they  say it's really bad. So this is a painful problem, and so their perception of the pain is what  you're judging that by. What's their pain? Zero is nothing, 10 is being burned alive. If you  have a patient that's like, it's an eight or nine on the pain scale, then if they've taken a  Medrol Dosepak in the past, I might use a Medrol Dosepak. Now, please make a note of  that. In my opinion, it's not good for us to put people on a steroid who have never been on  a steroid before, because people can have weird reactions to steroids.  [0:01:21]  Want to know how I know? Well, let me tell you. So back relatively early in my career, I  was treating someone with a retrodiscitis, and I put him on a Medrol Dosepak. And appar -  ently on steroids, he basically became psychotic and did some super duper bizarre, terri -  ble things. And he was engaged to be married, and his fiance called it off because of his  behavior. And I didn't know this at the time. I'd never heard of this side effect, but I googled  if this was potentially related to the medicine and found out it was, that there's a small per -  centage of people that will have a psychotic breakthrough on steroids. So from that point  on, I'm like, okay, I'm out of the steroid prescribing business, and I will do one of two  things. If they have had a steroid in the past, then I might prescribe a steroid, but I might  also refer them to their medical doctor for the steroid. And sometimes I'll call their medical  doctor and say, hey, here's what's going on, and I'm treating this person for this, and I don't  normally prescribe steroids to my patients. If you understand their medical history better  than I do, would you feel comfortable prescribing this person a Medrol Dosepak?  09/01/25   Page   of 1   12

SSC 2.0 - 310: Retrodiscitis Part 2  [0:02:45]  Now, you're fine doing a Medrol Dosepak. You don't need to jump through those hoops,  but just follow my advice there and only do a Medrol Dosepak for people who have already  done steroids in the past, and they had a good experience or they didn't have a negative  experience. Some people will be on steroids like, oh yeah, man, made me gain a bunch of  weight. That's up to the patient if they want to kind of go through that. That's not necessari -  ly a terrible experience, but it could be for that patient, and especially depending on what's  going on, they don't want to gain 10 pounds of water, and so keep that in mind. Now, if  you've never heard of a Medrol Dosepak, it is what's shown here on the screen, and it's a  Dosepak. So it shows, you know, first day, second day, third day. It shows as they go  through here how many of these pills to take, and they just follow the instructions, and  that's what they do, okay? So that's a Medrol Dosepak. Ibuprofen, obviously, you know  what ibuprofen is. That's typically what we're going to use if we're going to use an anti-in -  flammatory. Now, in a minute, I'm going to give you a time when you would not use anti-  inflammatories, and I bet you can guess when that is.  Iontophoresis and Phonophoresis   [0:03:59]  Iontophoresis and phonophoresis is using a steroid across the skin. Now, with oral medica -  tions, if the patient is pregnant, can't do it, right? They're not going to get permission,  you're not going to get permission from their OB to put them on anti-inflammatories, and  their OB is not going to prescribe them anti-inflammatories. But in my experience, the OB  will sign off on doing it through the skin. And pregnant women often get a retrodiscitis from  morning sickness, from throwing up. That's as wide as you're ever going to open your  mouth voluntarily, and it's kind of not voluntarily, is it? It's involuntary that you're awake, so  it's not like the sedated person being intubated, but you're going to open your mouth as  wide as humanly possible, as wider than you ever have before when you're throwing up.  And a lot of women, unfortunately, during their first trimester, sometimes their entire preg -  nancy, are throwing up a lot, and that's going to or could cause a retrodiscitis. So watch for  that.  [0:05:05]  So if that happens, then what I do is I call the   OB, hey, this person has this, and I'd like to  get them to a physical therapist to do iontophoresis to push this steroid across the skin just  into the joint rather than them doing anything oral, and they'll be like, yeah, that's fine. So  iontophoresis is using a medicated pad, so this would be soaked in a solution, and then  the pad is a negative field on there, and the steroid is a negative ion, and that's kind of  pushed into the skin. Or phonophoresis, pictured here, we don't actually have the coupling  gel on there, but if you've ever had ultrasound, you're using a coupling gel there, and then  you have that ultrasound unit, and you move around, and they keep moving the whole  time. And in the coupling gel, they will incorporate a steroid, so that's pushing that steroid  09/01/25   Page   of 2   12

SSC 2.0 - 310: Retrodiscitis Part 2  across the skin using the ultrasound. That can be helpful if they don't just have joint pain,  but all their muscles hurt. Sometimes the muscles will hurt because the muscles are trying  to stabilize the joint. The muscles are trying to keep it from moving, so you'll have muscle  discomfort too. If they have muscular discomfort in the area, these muscles are   hot,  they're painful to palpation too, it's not just the joint, I will tend to go phonophoresis. If it's  really just focused right on the jaw joint, iontophoresis.  Splint Therapy (Aqualizer)   [0:06:30]  Splint therapy. Any splint for an acute retrodiscitis should be temporary for use until the in -  flammation is resolved. Perfect splint for the retrodiscitis case would self-adjust as the in -  flammation goes down, and that is the Aqualizer. Now, you may be familiar with the Aqual -  izer. Usually most dentists aren't unless they've studied at Spear. Frank Spear is a fan of  the Aqualizer. I think there's some other people that teach there that are. So I find that a lot  of dentists there are, but when I speak at big, big dental meetings and stuff, maybe 10% of  people raise their hand when I say, hey, have you ever seen this before? So for those of  you who have never seen this before, so we have two lakes, two lakes connected by a riv -  er. So two lakes connected by a river. And this is how it goes between the teeth. So the  little pads, the lake pads go between the posterior teeth. And if we had our retrodiscitis on  the left side here, they would be open by here.  [0:07:30]  So over on this lake, they would bite down and it would squish that water over here and it  would be thicker. So where the water is getting squished, it's thinner and where the water  is being pushed is thicker. Now, the cool thing about the Aqualizer is it will self-adjust as  that inflammation goes down in my joint and my condyle can seat further up than it self-ad -  justs. Other cool thing about the Aqualizer is if they are clenching really hard, grinding their  teeth, stuff like that, they'll break it. And then you're going to learn from the use of the  Aqualizer, possibly the etiology. Yeah, you're busting the heck out of these things. We  charge about $30 for the Aqualizer. We've charged that much for ever. I think that has lit -  erally been our fee for 25 years. The cost of around $15, I think, ish, maybe $20. Little  heads up on this. So these are actually really, really cool how they're made. But a little  heads up is this edge here, this edge all the way around here. So this piece of material  that shows up here better on this picture, that is a piece of tape and it's stuck on by a per -  son.  [0:08:47]  So it's stuck on by hand. And then this edge, I guess I can just show it here. So this edge  here is smoothed by hand. So where these are made, I've been there, there's people sit -  ting there with little sandpaper basically that go on this edge and they feel with their finger  to make sure that it's smooth. If I were you, I would teach your team members that before  they give this to the patient, they check that edge. As I've heard a few dentists tell me like,  09/01/25   Page   of 3   12

SSC 2.0 - 310: Retrodiscitis Part 2  oh yeah, I tried to use the Aqualizer, but my patients hated it. They said it cut up their  cheek and stuff. That's maybe somebody at the Aqualizer factory who had calloused fin -  gers or something and couldn't feel that rough edge. So check, have your team check be -  fore they give out the Aqualizer. We use these every dang day in our practice, every day,  every day. But if you have one that's sharp, I don't want you to have a negative experi -  ence. But when I found that out, I was like, oh my gosh, you've got to be kidding me. So  every one of these is hand fashioned by an actual person.  [0:09:57]  This isn't just all machined. And they're like, yeah, every one. And I've been using these for  over 20 years and I never knew that until very recently. I found that out. I'm like, my gosh, I  would have paid double if you would have told me that these were all hand fashioned.  Okay, so that's the Aqualizer. Aqualizer.com. Fabulous, fabulous thing to use. Now there's  other things on the market. One of our Spencer Study Club members likes to use the  Placers Splint, which looks similar to an Aqualizer, and it's very cheap. It's like a dollar. I  think you buy them in 10 packs and stuff like that for $10 on Amazon. And that's fine. So  you're putting that space there. Obviously, it's not going to self-adjust. So I do like the self-  adjust aspect of the Aqualizer. I also like the diagnostic aspect of the Aqualizer of if they  are really clenching, they will break it. Whereas the Placers, they won't. Maybe you would  see some indentations on it if they really got after it. The Aqualizer is just going to be more  obvious. So that's kind of my pitch for the Aqualizer.  Splint Therapy   [0:10:57]  Splint therapy. So this would be a hard, custom-made splint. Once the initial retrodiscitis is  resolved, a night guard or day splint or both may be indicated to reduce the adverse joint  loading. Why would you do that? Well, it's going to depend on your diagnosis and what  you think the etiology of that diagnosis is.  Indications   [0:11:17]  So let's look at some indications for splint therapy. Retrodiscitis that keeps coming back.  This is not just the one time, like I had, you know, 15 years ago, and then it disappeared  forever. And then the recent thing, I was able to take care of it almost immediately, went  right back to wearing my oral appliance, no big deal. So really, I didn't need to change any -  thing. I just realized, yeah, I slept weird. Something strange happened, caused retrodisci -  tis. No treatment really indicated in that point. But on the other hand, if you had a patient  that's like, yeah, boy, every few months I wake up with this, and there's a key point that I  just threw at you there, I wake up with this, well, maybe that's a night guard because they  09/01/25   Page   of 4   12

SSC 2.0 - 310: Retrodiscitis Part 2  wake up with it. So maybe you're going to protect that tissue at night, Farrar style night  guard with our little ramp thingy on it that doesn't let their jaw fall back when they close.  [0:12:05]  That might be a good use for that. Patients aware of clenching or grinding during the day  or night, and this is likely the ideology of the retrodiscitis. When you ask them, are you  aware of clenching or grinding your teeth, they're like, yeah, I do. Okay, so then that would  be someone like, you're aware of when. Oh my gosh, I think I just grind my teeth all night  long. Okay, or I've had a night guard from the dentist in the past, but then this happened.  Well, maybe that's because the night guard they had in the past allowed their jaw to slide  back when they were clenching, and that puts some pressure on the retrodiscal tissues.  Retrodiscitis does not resolve with use of the Aqualizer. Okay, that's a weird one, right? So  if they are using the Aqualizer, they got that space there, but it's just not getting better, then  we better start looking at our diagnosis before we just throw them into splint therapy, but  that could be an indication for the splint. Another indication would be not necessarily that it  doesn't resolve with the Aqualizer, but the patient can't wear the Aqualizer. They just don't  like the way it feels.   It's flopping around in their mouth. They got to be able to talk at work,  so they can't use it during the day. That might be an indication of like, well, let's make you  something that's going to be a little bit easier for you to tolerate during the day.  [0:13:17]  And the last one there, the patient breaks the Aqualizer within the first few nights. That in -  dicates there's something weird going on while they sleep. Rule out an airway issue. Ask  them, do you snore? Ask them, does your bed partner ever notice you stop breathing  when you sleep? When in doubt, rule it out, but that could be if they're like, nope, don't  snore. Bed partner says, I never stop breathing. I have no problem. I'm wide awake. I have  no issues with that. So we kind of rule out sleep apnea, at least from the history there, at  least from our questions, but they're breaking Aqualizers all the time. Then there's some -  thing going on. You know, look at their medications. Look at that kind of stuff of possible  reasons that they are clenching and grinding their teeth, but are there indications for giving  them a helmet if they're banging their head against the wall?  [ 0:14:02]  Heck yeah, there are. So while we're trying to figure out why are they banging their head  against the wall, feel free to give them a helmet. In this case, they're breaking the Aqualiz -  er. We need to give them a helmet for their banging their head against the wall. That would  be a splint.  What About PRF?   [0:14:20]  And what about PRF? So would it be maybe a good idea to do PRF in a retrodiscitis case?  You bet it would. And in Spencer Study Club 1.0, we don't talk anything about PRF, of  course, when we're talking about retrodiscitis, because I didn't know anything about PRF  09/01/25   Page   of 5   12

SSC 2.0 - 310: Retrodiscitis Part 2  and treating retrodiscitis. Nowadays, though, if someone doesn't get better almost imme -  diately with the way that I've just taught you, I would be adding PRF. As a matter of fact, I  might add PRF immediately right from the beginning, just because of the speed of which  this is going to heal. One of our Spencer Study Club members, his son, developed a  retrodiscitis, and it was really, really bothering him. As a matter of fact, it was on a trip he  was driving from his home in Tulsa, Oklahoma, out to south of Salt Lake to go to school.  [0:15:15]  And on that trip, for who knows why, he developed this retrodiscitis. And he called his dad,  and he's like, oh my gosh, dad, this is killing me, and what should I do? And his dad got  him into our office, and Dr. Mangelson gave him PRF, and then he was better like in 24  hours. So could we have treated him with our standard protocol, Aqualizer, Advil, stuff like  that? Absolutely we could have, but he was in a ton of pain. He was like really, it was real -  ly, really affecting him. He was scared, it was hurting him, and so we got him better as fast  as we could with the PRF, and as I mentioned, it was really fast. He was better in a day. I  see this with PRF routinely when we're using this for all sorts of different problems. Some -  times in my family, you know, a knee problem or some other kind of pain that somebody  has, usually the response is pretty dang quick. So if you have somebody and they're like,  man, I want to get better really fast, then bring on the PRF. Now if we're doing PRF, what  are we not going to do?  [0:16:19]  Anti-inflammatories. So PRF is helping the proper inflammatory healing process. So in -  flammation, when it's on purpose from the body, is not bad. If I cut myself, there's going to  be inflammation, there's going to be redness, there's going to be swelling, there's going to  be all that stuff, right? And that's bringing all the good stuff in to heal that area. So we're  not going to use anti-inflammatories if we're doing PRF because that would reduce those  cells that want to come into that area.  PRF Literature   [0:16:54]  There's some good literature on this, and we cover this, of course, in the PRF section as  well, but just to kind of go through the studies because it's specifically about painful TM  joints. They don't use the term retrodiscitis here, but just kind of painful joints. So just kind  of go through this. This was 37 patients with internal derangements, and this goes from  Wilkes class 1 to 5, and that's like basically barely a problem to degenerative joint disease.  Patients were injected with 1.5 to 2 cc's of PRF in the superior joint space at two-week in -  tervals. Pain and subjective dysfunction were recorded using the visual analog scale, and  then they did their stats on it.  [0:17:34]  So 33 of the 48 patients showed significant reduction in pain at eight weeks and at 3, 6,  and 12 months. So at two-week intervals, that's pretty quick, but we do these typically at  09/01/25   Page   of 6   12

SSC 2.0 - 310: Retrodiscitis Part 2  monthly intervals and we'll do three, but that's okay. These protocols are fine. So at eight  weeks, they were significantly better, 70% of them basically, and then they followed them  up three, six, 12 months later, and they were still doing good. So those are the responders.  15 of the 48 joints did not improve. These were the non-responders. Now, even those  people, I'll bet you that they did have some pain relief. It just wasn't as statistically signifi -  cant as the others. But then let's look at the who were the better responders here. The  best responders to liquid PRF injections were internal derangement stages four and five.  So these were people with way worse joints that felt better compared to the one and two  and three. Non-significant but notable decrease in dysfunction was found. Okay, so what  we learned from this is actually those with the worse arthritic joints responded the best to  PRF. Now, possibly, there's multiple reasons why this could be.  [0:18:55]  It could be actually a misdiagnosis. Maybe the pain was coming from the temporal tendon  and not the jaw joint. Maybe they didn't have a retrodiscitis or maybe they did the PRF in -  jections but the patient was still taking anti-inflammatories or stuff like that. Bottom line, as  the conclusion here, PRF exhibits long-term analgesic effects in most patients with painful  TMJ or said another way, it makes the joint feel better. Okay, so these are people, again,  this is not apples to apples that they had a retrodiscitis, but just in general, PRF just makes  the joint feel better and particularly in people that are more advanced, more advanced  arthritis.  Retrodiscitis Recap   [0:19:37]  So here's our retrodiscitis recap. Pain in and around the jaw joint, posterior open bite on  the affected side, pain when they try to get their teeth together, no pain when they bite on  their tongue depressor on the affected side, anti-inflammatories, or not and, or PRF and an  aqualizer. Would you do PRF and the aqualizer in this case? You betcha. Just like you like  to do PRF with splint therapy, but if it's somebody with an acute retrodiscitis and you, you  know, their blood's available now and eight minutes from now I can stick them with the  PRF after I draw the blood so I can get on that fast.  [0:20:15]  Whereas to make a splint might take a while, got to scan their teeth and whatever, and  they may not be thrilled about putting the big scanner between the teeth. So to do PRF is  no problemo in somebody with a retrodiscitis. Just draw their blood, spin, stick back in,  then use the aqualizer the same reason you use a splint with PRF as crutches to take  pressure off the jaw joint.  What’s your Diagnosis?   [0:20:40]  09/01/25   Page   of 7   12

SSC 2.0 - 310: Retrodiscitis Part 2  On the splint therapy for retrodiscitis, that's all going to depend on what is your diagnosis.  What do you believe caused this retrodiscitis? So could it be clenching or grinding? Could  that be due to OSA? Ask the patient, do you snore? Has anyone ever told you stop breath -  ing when you sleep? So we're going to rule out sleep apnea. If you think that it could be  sleep apnea, then of course we're going to send them down that road. Was the etiology  acute trauma? Was the trauma likely to happen again?  Sports Related   [0:21:06]  Again, sports related, like if they're playing basketball, maybe they need an athletic mouth  guard. If they got hit in the face, and quick story, and reminds me of something, I had a pa -  tient once with a retrodiscitis, and turns out I noticed in my evaluation of him that he had  cauliflower ear. If you don't know what that means, then Google it. So cauliflower ear is  somebody who's been beaten the side of the head a lot, and wrestlers tend to have cau -  liflower ear, particularly if they don't wear the ear protection that they have to wear when  they're younger. They don't have to wear that sometimes when they get to the college lev -  el, and they'll get hit in the side of the head, and it swells up that cartilage, and after a  while they have these kind of deformed ears, while boxers will have cauliflower ear. Well,  he had that, and so I said, hey, notice you got cauliflower ear there, what do you do? And  he's like, oh, I cage fight. And I'm like, all right, so you're planning to continue cage fight -  ing? He's like, yeah, absolutely. I'm like, all right, well, I can get you better, but you under -  stand that it's just going to happen again, right? So either you need to become a way bet -  ter cage fighter, or you're just going to have this over and over again if you're getting  popped in the face. And he's like, yeah, I get it. So he wore a mouth guard that protected  him, but it can't protect him from everything.  [0:22:28]  So just have your treatment flow from your diagnosis of the probable etiology. If you think  this is clenching or grinding, then we've got to figure out daytime or nighttime. Again, if it's  nighttime, then we're thinking, well, maybe sleep apnea. If it's daytime, we're thinking, well,  maybe something else. So just let it flow through what's going on. If it was due to maybe  being intubated, then clearly Splint's not going to have anything to do with that. Just let it  flow from your diagnosis.  Based Upon Your Initial Diagnosis   [0:23:02]  Based on what you're thinking it is, then you might do a night guard only. If they're like,  yeah, it hurts in the morning, gets better throughout the day, it might be a day splint. Oh,  my gosh, I just cannot keep myself from biting my teeth together when I'm driving to work  and I'm on the road with all the idiots. That might be a day splint. Or it's like, you know  09/01/25   Page   of 8   12

SSC 2.0 - 310: Retrodiscitis Part 2  what? I'm not sure. It just kind of comes and goes, and sometimes I wake with it. Some -  times it's more in the afternoon. I do catch myself with my teeth together a lot. That could  be a night guard and a day splint.  [0:23:30]  And on the night guard, I'm going to advocate here for a Farrar-style night guard with a lit -  tle ramp thingy, because when you close down, it's going to bring your jaw, again, not nec -  essarily forward. You don't have to do it forward. It could be exactly in their habitual occlu -  sion, but it's going to keep their jaw from falling backwards. When? When their teeth are  on it. Remember, just because we put the ramp on it doesn't mean it holds their jaw for -  ward. We would need a sleep-style appliance to do that, a sleep apnea-style appliance.  The Ferris-style night guard only works. It's only doing something. It's only active when  their teeth are on it, when they bite down on it. Well, that's kind of the only time we care.  Even if you kind of picture in your mind's eye that they're open, to cause actual force on  the retrodiscal tissue, gravity isn't going to be enough to hurt them. They are doing some -  thing to hurt themselves, or maybe they're sleeping weird on their chin, and that is causing  a problem on the other side. But that's not typically going to be the case.  [ 0:24:36]  There's going to be something else going on. If you do think it's nighttime-related, if you've  ruled out, at least through their history, a sleep problem, then the night guard I would use  would be a Ferris-style night guard.  What Kind of Splint?   [0:24:50]  What kind of splint? Well, now we're back in our splint therapy lecture, and if there's no in -  ternal derangement, then we're going to call that CO, right? Phonetic 60, 61, 62. Why 61,  62? It's that kind of down and forward a little bit, taking that pressure off of the jaw joint if  we are in that 60, 61, 62 position. If they have an internal derangement, if they've got a re -  ducing disc displacement, CR, right? Why would we not try to bring them onto the disc?  We know that their retrodiscal tissues are getting beat up. Let's put them on the disc. Then  what are you going to do? Well, you're talking about phase 2, aren't you? You're talking  about the possibility of, hey, your jaw may want to stay on the disc, so you go back to your  TMJ demonstrator, go back to that whole section on the splint therapy stuff, weaning, all  that sort of thing.  [0:25:40]  We have to go into depth on that, but if they have a disc displacement, why would you not  make the appliance on the disc? Now, the day or night, we're still deciding on that, but the  position would be CR, a CR day splint if day splint makes sense, a CR night guard if night  guard makes sense. Does that make sense? If they are off the disc with a reducing disc  displacement that you can capture, then put them into CR. If you think that they have a  non-reducing disc displacement, then you could still bring them into that more CR position,  09/01/25   Page   of 9   12

SSC 2.0 - 310: Retrodiscitis Part 2  but remember, it can only be CR if we're getting the disc back into place. So I would prob -  ably say no internal derangement or a suspected non-reducing disc displacement, CO, 60,  61, 62. Reducing disc displacement, CR. Okay, so we can actually bring them into CR.  If a Day Splint is Indicated   [0:26:40]  If the day splint's indicated, then this is back to our splint therapy lecture. Treat for four to  six weeks, full-time use of the day splint or until the symptoms are resolved. If you're doing  this with PRF, it's going to be a lot faster. You're going to get them better quicker.  [0:26:55]  Attempt to wean from use of the day splint during the day, like always. Have the patient  continue to use the night guard if there is one or continue to wear the day splint while  sleeping. So that would be our splint therapy for a retrodiscitis. And I would strongly con -  sider if you're getting into splint therapy for the retrodiscitis, why would you not add PRF?  That is what I would do if I were you. If you're unable to wean them off, reconsider the di -  agnosis and the ideology. Maybe there's something else going on. Have you ruled out the  sleep apnea stuff at this point? Why are they continuing to have a retrodiscitis? Why can't  they go without their splint? Or phase two may be indicated. But before I would do phase  two, I would try to figure out why can't you wean off? Most people can. If you haven't done  the PRF yet and they're having trouble weaning off, now would be a good time to add the  PRF. When was also a good time? Right at the very beginning. But at this point, they're  struggling to wean off, maybe now you add the PRF, give their body a really good chance  to heal rather than putting them into orthodontics.  [0:28:01]  If the ideology of the retrodiscitis is predictable, so clenching with driving, for example,  have the patient wear the splint during that potentially traumatic activity. Some people will  wear it when they work out. Some people, even though they know that they're not sup -  posed to clench their teeth when they're lifting weights, they do anyway. So you can have,  if they have a predictable behavior that's potentially causing this, just have them wear it  then.  The Power of PRF   [0:28:24]  And don't forget the power of PRF. PRF early on, PRF in the middle, PRF at the end, don't  care when, just use it. It's going to make the treatment more predictable. It's going to make  the treatment faster. Their pain relief is going to be faster. Their ability to wean off is going  to be enhanced because of that, not just the pain reduction, but in the healing that's going  to occur. Cannot more strongly encourage you to use PRF. And think about this, so a  retrodiscitis type of case is almost by definition, I would say, necessary for progression  09/01/25   Page   of 10   12

SSC 2.0 - 310: Retrodiscitis Part 2  from reducing displacement to non-reducing, non-reducing to degenerative joint disease.  We have to inflame the tissue and break it down to have it be ultimately broken down so  much that it's gone and to be bone on bone.  [0:29:21]  So if it was your loved one that had this problem, wouldn't you do PRF and try to give that  tissue a fighting chance? I sure would. Okay, so don't discount this and be like, you know, I  don't want to give a shot in the joint or whatever. Boy, find somebody who will and use this.  I really believe, I'm not saying this as of this recording, but very, very soon, I predict that I  will consider not doing PRF malpractice. Okay, now we're a long ways from this being  taught at the dental school level or any of that. I mean, you didn't learn anything about  TMD in dental school anyway, did you? But as far as I'm concerned, if someone was treat -  ing my family member and they did not offer PRF, then I would be super duper disappoint -  ed. Just today, as a matter of fact, I was texting with an oral surgeon and the oral surgeon  does PRF for implants, which lots of oral surgeons do, but recently we lectured together  and I talked about PRF because I don't go anywhere without talking about PRF. And just  today, I was very happy about this.  [0:30:32]  He texted me, he's like, hey, I'd like to learn more about PRF for the jaw joint, what tubes  do you use and what's the protocol and stuff like that. And I was like, hey, absolutely, here  you go. And you might think, well, this dude's going to mow your lawn now. He's going to  start doing PRF injections for the jaw joint. That's okay because he's going to help people.  I'm happy about that. However, I did throw in on the text, it's like, by the way, we find that  PRF in conjunction with splint therapy is much more effective. In other words, PRF with  crutches is going to be a lot more effective. Oral surgeons know their stuff. They know their  anatomy. And I'm sure that he's going to think about that and he's going to be like, yeah,  that makes a lot of sense that having splint therapy with PRF would do better. I don't want  to manage people on splints. I think I'll just send to Jamison's office. The oral surgeon I'm  talking about was up here where I live, and that's an hour from our office. So, again, I'm  sure he's just thinking, yeah, I could offer this for people so that I don't have to send them  to Jamison's office. But I'm pretty confident that after I throw in that splint therapy is often  indicated here to enhance the healing nature of PRF, he's going to be like, that makes a lot  of sense.  Retrodiscitis as Most Common Painful Problem   [0:31:47]  Okay, so that is our retrodiscitis of the temporomandibular joint, the most common painful  problem. The most common painful problem that you're ever going to see with oral appli -  ance therapy is retrodiscitis, possibly contributing to posterior open bite in people where  that posterior open bite is painful, possibly just contributing anatomically to that posterior  open bite if you think of those tissues plumping up overnight, possibly contributing to the  09/01/25   Page   of 11   12

SSC 2.0 - 310: Retrodiscitis Part 2  person wanting to stay on their disc when you put them into a CR splint because that  retrodiscal tissue healing. Understand this anatomy. Understand this problem and this not  problem. So the example I just gave there, if you're holding someone on the disc with a  CR splint and their retrodiscal tissues heal, maybe you're doing PRF with all of this and all  these tissues are healing, well it makes sense that they may not be able to go back to full  occlusion because their previous habitual occlusion was squashed retrodiscal tissues all  the way up in the socket.  [0:32:59]  This is why we talk about phase two with our patients. This is why we give them a heads  up, is because you are bringing them into a better anatomic and physiological position. I  hope that really makes sense. If it's still a little bit fuzzy, man, watch this one two or three  times. Get really, really good on this. I want you also to be able to talk to someone on  Zoom, over the phone, via text, diagnosing a retrodiscitis because you've got this down.  You understand what's going on anatomically and you're going to be able to help a ton of  people. All right, take care.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 12   12

