SSC 2.0 - 319: Regenerative TMD  SSC 2.0   Level 3  319: Regenerative TMD  [intro music]  Regenerative Medicine  For TMJ Disorder (The END of Open Joint Surgery)   [0:00:12]  Welcome to Regenerative Medicine for TMJ Disorders, or what I am subtitling the end of  open joint surgery. I really hope that that is the case. I hope that maybe you're watching  this well into the future. Maybe it's 2030 now, and no one really talks about open joint  surgery anymore, except for people that have already been down the road of open joint  surgery. In 2025, as I'm recording this, and you will see some of these cases that will be  put in there, and I've also sprinkled these throughout level three and a little bit even in level  one, we are seeing nothing short of miraculous results in our practice treating people for  their TMJ problems using platelet-rich fibrin. And when we originally recorded SSC 1.0, if  you will, we didn't know, or I should say I didn't know anything about regenerative medicine  techniques per se. So if you go back to those original recordings in level three, I do talk  about prolotherapy. And in this re-recording of all the material, I talk about that as well and  kind of give the context. And now in our new recordings, we compare that even with re -  generative medicine techniques of PRF, PRP, things like that.  [0:01:41]  But as you may have heard me say on these other videos, but you may be watching these  out of order, we never really got that big of a result with prolotherapy. It gave the promise  of healing. It gave the promise of regeneration. It gave the promise of a technique that  would harness the body's healing power to help these patients get better faster. But in re -  ality, it just wasn't that powerful. We found that it would be pretty helpful in young people.  As a matter of fact, my daughter, Jazzy, she had prolotherapy when she started having her  jaw pop and click when she was about 16 years old, 17 years old. And me always being of  the opinion of I'm going to give my family the best treatment I possibly can, we did splint  therapy with her and we injected her jaw joints in order to try to stabilize that disc dis -  placement. Now, if that happened nowadays with a family member, I would immediately go  to PRF. I would not mess around, if you will, with the prolotherapy principles. So this next  bit in this presentation on regenerative medicine, it's going to be a little different than my  typical content that you're used to in that it's going to be really a review of the literature, a  review of history of these things.  [0:03:17]  09/01/25   Page   of 1   13

SSC 2.0 - 319: Regenerative TMD  I'm going to break one of the cardinal rules and read a lot of these slides and comment on  specific things in the slides. Now that can be helpful to you because there's not a lot of  content in this section that is clinical in nature and how to. There is some, but I'm going to  be kind of going through, again, a little bit more history and data. And so this may be a  presentation that lends itself to you listening to in your car as you drive back and forth to  work, maybe two or three times so that you kind of get really conversant with these regen -  erative medicine techniques and the history behind them and what's the difference be -  tween PRP and PRF and PRGF and things like that. So that's what we'll be going through  here. In the splint therapy section, I talk there about prolotherapy. In the injections outside  the deep dark hole, I talk about prolotherapy. But this is really the lecture that will give you  all of the basic science on it and help you to perhaps understand better where this comes  from. And my hope with that is I don't know that there's a lot of this content actually that is  going to change how you treat people.  [0:04:37]  And usually that's my entire focus, right? Like I mostly just care about outcomes and you  helping more people. Having said that, there is definitely something to be said for being  able to speak to your colleagues. As a matter of fact, quick story. Just yesterday, I was  talking to a sleep physician who is helping out in our University of Utah Dental Sleep Medi -  cine Mastery Program. And he was commenting on, so he's been given a slide deck from  the Academy of Dental Sleep Medicine to prepare from so he doesn't have to start from  scratch. And he was going through this and he's like, why do dentists need to know things  about like Pcrit and all of these little nuanced minor things with sleep apnea? This doesn't  really change how they would treat anyone. These are things for the sleep doctors to be  aware of, but the dentists themselves, really not that important. And we had a long discus -  sion about that because I agreed with him. I said, you know, you're right. I don't know that  that is critical for the dentist to know these things. However, where it does become critical  is the dentist going through a sleep study, let's say, and finding things in the sleep study  that may indicate that the patient is maybe doing better with oral appliance therapy than  the AHI would allude to.  [0:06:09]  Or maybe there's something in the baseline study that the dentist wants to bring up. And  the fact that that dentist will have a really robust understanding of the basics of sleep med -  icine to a much higher level than really any primary care physician would, that can allow  that dentist to have a very intelligent and meaningful conversation with a sleep doctor.  That's the point of this content. The point of this content is I want you to know more about  regenerative medicine and how to communicate with physicians, orthopedic physicians,  primary care doctors, how to just really know more about this. And also, I think one of the  important aspects of this is, of course, my title here is Regenerative Medicine for TMJ Dis -  orders. But everything I'm about to talk about extends to all musculoskeletal problems and  beyond. So this isn't just about TMJ problems. It's far broader. And understanding this, I  really believe, I almost can't go a day without evangelizing about PRF and talking to peo -  ple that have shoulder problems, back problems, knee problems, whatever. I'm fascinated  09/01/25   Page   of 2   13

SSC 2.0 - 319: Regenerative TMD  at the progress that's being made with stem cell therapies in diseases such as Parkinson's  and all sorts of neurodegenerative problems that have plagued mankind for years and  years, if decades or hundreds of years.  [0:08:01]  And now we're doing things that are moving the needle, that are relatively non-invasive  and just amazing. So that is kind of my initial push here for why should you care about  this? Why should you even go through this content? That's the why, is this is going to give  you a firmer foundation. It's going to allow you to talk to your medical colleagues. Also,  when you are out there, I hope, sharing this with your dental community and whatnot, and  someone shoots a question at you, you're not going to be like, well, yeah, I don't know. I  just, you know, I take blood out, I spin it in a thing, I stick it back in them, and it just works. I  really don't understand any of this other stuff. While there could be an argument made for  like, yeah, who cares? That's really all you need to do is take the blood out, spin it in a  centrifuge, stick it back in them, and that's going to work. That's pretty strong evidence that  that's the case. And is the fact that you understand more of these underlying principles and  underlying biological processes going on, is that going to change the result for the patient?  [0:09:17]  No. But what it is going to do is when you go out and you talk to people, like say your oral  surgery colleagues or stuff like that, they're going to understand that, all right, this isn't just  superficial. This isn't just, you aren't just a proceduralist that's doing something and you  don't really understand what's going on. You do understand the basic science behind this  to the point that we understand it right now. And then you're going to be able to perhaps  influence them to give this a look.  Regenerative Medicine   [0:09:46]  Okay, let's get started. So what is regenerative medicine? Here's kind of a nice overview of  it. And you're familiar with stem cells. So this is using stem cells, but other bioengineered  materials. And as the name implies, we are looking for a regeneration, which also implies a  breakdown and then taking it back to health and normal function and form. That is regen -  erative medicine in a nutshell. And this is becoming more and more and more popular, of  course, because if we can reverse the hands of time, that is better than just slowing the  progress of a disease. For years, I have told people that one of our goals with treatment  for a TMJ problem is to help them get worse as slow as possible.  [0:10:36]  And that's really, if you think of any musculoskeletal problem, if you yourself have a knee  problem or a shoulder problem or a hip problem or a neck problem or you name it, the  doctors you're working with are typically going to say that. Here's exercises that will help  you maintain, that will help you not get worse as fast. Here's maybe a steroid injection to  09/01/25   Page   of 3   13

SSC 2.0 - 319: Regenerative TMD  get you out of pain. But they're thinking, well, this might postpone your getting a joint re -  placement or something until later.  History and Evolution of Platelet-Rich Plasma (PRP)   [0:11:14]  So let's talk now about the history and evolution of platelet-rich plasma. Like I said, I'll be  kind of reading more of these slides than I typically would, but again, that's kind of the  point of this is to take you through the history and the basic science versus kind of my typi -  cal model of telling you cases and stories and things like that.  The Discovery   [0:11:37]  So the discovery of structures other than erythrocytes and the leukocytes in blood goes  way back to 1842, and they titled these things platelets. They looked at the role of platelets  and figured out that this was related to blood coagulation, and that is really the core of the  principles that we're going to talk about is we are creating a healing process. If you were to  have a cut, the materials that show up from the blood and that blood that clots when ex -  posed to the air, that is trapping within a fibrin matrix all of the materials that are going to  help heal that wound ultimately, and that's why you can have a cut or a nick to your skin or  whatever, and it will bleed, and then after a little while you have a scab, and then after a  little while that goes away, and then it's healed, and oftentimes without scarring or perma -  nent defect of any kind. That is regenerative medicine. There's a problem there, and the  body regenerated its own tissues there through this process. That's really what we're deal -  ing with.  Skin Grafting   [0:12:49]  Skin grafting became popular in the 1940s. They were using embryonic extracts, so taking  stem cells is what this would later be called, composed of growth factors, cytokines to  promote this wound healing. Because it was found that these growth factors would pro -  mote wound healing, they started using these materials in skin grafting in order to make  that more effective.  Platelet Transfusion   [0:13:10]  Then in the early 20th century, they looked at doing platelet transfusions for people with  thrombocytopenia, which is where you don't have platelets, and of course if you don't, then  09/01/25   Page   of 4   13

SSC 2.0 - 319: Regenerative TMD  you can't have blood clotting, which means you would bleed to death with a relatively mi -  nor wound. Because of the need of this technique, platelet concentration was improved,  and this will then of course go towards what we're doing nowadays with platelet-rich pro -  cedures.  “Platelet-Rich Plasma”   [0:13:40]  The first of those being platelet-rich plasma. 1920s, citrates were used as anticoagulants  in obtaining platelet concentrates. Citrates were put into the test tubes in order to keep the  blood from coagulating. Later in the 1950s and '60s, this improved due to the advent of  plastics that were flexible and not having to use the glass containers anymore. The term  platelet-rich plasma was first used in 1954 and was just referring to these concentrated  platelet transfusions that were available in blood banks for people that needed help with  healing or people with thrombocytopenia. That's the first use of it, not really in the same  term that we're using it nowadays, but that's when it was first used in just in these collected  or concentrated platelet preparations for people with this disorder.  Orthopedics & Sports   [0:14:39]  Around the late '90s, PRP started to be used more frequently in orthopedic injuries, includ -  ing tendon and ligament and muscle and cartilage injuries, disorders, things like that.   This  then became more popular because of professional athletes giving these treatments and  that becoming more common knowledge that these cutting-edge treatments were being  used in professional athletes. Here's a partial list of famous athletes who have received  platelet-rich plasma therapy. I'll just kind of scroll through this slowly here. This is a very  partial list, but there's a lot of people on this that you would recognize.  [0:15:28]  Of course, I would say that this is also just a fraction of the actual numbers out there be -  cause these are all people that would have let this be known. They were public about it,  where I'm sure that maybe that's only 1% of the case. The other 99% of the case are peo -  ple that are going in having these things done. They don't necessarily want anyone to  know that they're injured or that they've had an injury because that could then affect their  ability to have their career. It could affect the competitor's thought process on what's going  on, all sorts of factors, their endorsements. You name it, all sorts of things. So I would say  that there's 10 times, 100 times, 1,000 times more of these athletes that are having this  done.  [0:16:19]  One of our colleagues, if you go into the archives from both our Zoom meetings and also  Spencer Study Club Live, I think 2024, yes, for sure 2024, we had Dr. Robert Tallick speak  09/01/25   Page   of 5   13

SSC 2.0 - 319: Regenerative TMD  at that. He is a neurosurgeon, a spine surgeon rather, a spine surgeon who now only does  PRF and exosome treatments and things like that for people with spinal problems. He'll  also treat knees and hips and shoulders and ankles and whatever. If you were ever to visit  his office, he's treated probably a half dozen Spencer Study Club members as of this  recording. They've all had really good experiences there, but you will see that he has pic -  tures of athletes in his office, some tennis players, golf players, things like that. Who are  people that he has helped with his treatments. They are not on this list. So I agree with this  last statement of that literature there, that because of this, this is something that's well  known. If you talk to people about PRP, they tend to have heard of that before. If you say,  yeah, this is often used in athletes to help them recover from injuries, people are going to  know about this.  Autologous Biologics   [0:17:41]  So let's continue now this discussion of autologous biologics, autologous meaning coming  from yourself. So all of these preparations that we're talking about start with the patient's  own blood. This is not taking it from embryonic stem cells or other tissues from other peo -  ple. This is taking it from the patient's own body.  PRP (Platelet-Rich-Plasma)   [0:18:06]  So here's the first study that is going to actually be about TMJ problems. So if you see  down here, 2019 platelet-rich plasma in treatment of temporomandibular disorders. And  looking at using PRP, and the authors say here, this represents an emerging regenerative  therapy for injuries in the orthopedic field and encouraging results showing anti-inflamma -  tory, analgesic, and antibacterial properties. So taking PRP from other fields and applying  it to TMJ problems goes back several years here, and we'll see more of these studies.  PRGF (Plasma Rich in Growth Factors)   [0:18:43]  So here's a term you may not have heard before, plasma rich in growth factors or PRGF.  And this 2020 study looked at using PRGF in periodontal disease and points out that one  of the outcomes of using PRGF in periodontal disease is bone regeneration. So there we  have, again, not just stopping a process, which is great if we could just arrest a degenera -  tive process, that that's really good, but actually regenerating the bone. Pretty cool.  PRF (Platelet-Rich Fibrin)   [0:19:23]  09/01/25   Page   of 6   13

SSC 2.0 - 319: Regenerative TMD  Then we get to platelet-rich fibrin. And this 2022 article looked at all manner of use of PRF  in dentistry and points out the main difference here in platelet-rich fibrin, and that is a lack  of an anticoagulant. So this is what makes this even more special is if you think about this  process here, so PRP and PRGF use an anticoagulant. And as we discussed right at the  beginning here, really what we're dealing with when we're thinking about regenerative  medicine and this aspect of regenerative medicine, it's the analogy of I cut my arm, bleed -  ing occurs, a clot occurs, and then things are trapped in that clot. And that kind of then  starts off this whole healing cascade. Well, if we stop that coagulation process, then that  stops part of this healing aspect.  [0:20:32]  So with PRF, techniques were developed to be able to do this without needing the antico -  agulant. The reason an anticoagulant was needed with these other preparations is the way  they would centrifuge the blood was very, very long. And just the length of time, even if it  was attempted to not expose the blood to a lot of air, just there would be some coagulation  if you didn't put that anticoagulant in there. With PRF, the spin times are quite low, and  therefore we can get away without having to use the anticoagulant. And we see on this lit -  tle graphic here some of the things that are kind of trapped down in this fibrin matrix.  [0:21:18]  Okay, so this is a nice little graphic that I found that I think is helpful for you. So if you are  listening to this, this is a slide that you need to look at. So kind of going through the differ -  ence between PRP, PRGF, and PRF. And I'd spend a little time with this because this is  going to help you to be conversant with your orthopedic surgeons, so the people that theo -  retically would know the most about this, and then people like oral surgeons and periodon -  tists and others who may be using this on a regular basis, but themselves aren't necessari -  ly steeped in the history of where all these things come from. So PRP 1998, I'm going to  go through this. So the protocol, very complex, meaning that there's multiple spin cycles.  It's a complicated recipe, if you will. Speed rate of the spin is slow, and that is relative to  others.  [0:22:16]  Possible bias in the reproducibility, use of anticoagulants, yes. And again, I won't go  through all of these different things here, but look at these, and I'll put all of this together in  just a second. But those are kind of the main things with PRP. The one thing I really want  you to remember there is that an anticoagulant is used in PRP and that the process is long  and complex. And this is one of the main reasons, in my personal experience, I'll tell you  right now a story, of why it's not used all the time. You would think that this would just be  standard of care, and it's not. And here's why it isn't, because of this. So when Jenny had  shoulder surgery and she hurt herself on a mountain bike ride that I took her on a moun -  tain bike ride on a trail that she had no business being on and she fell and she hurt her  shoulder. And luckily she didn't have to have a shoulder replacement or anything like that,  but she tore some tissues in her shoulder that had to be surgically repaired.  [0:23:16]  09/01/25   Page   of 7   13

SSC 2.0 - 319: Regenerative TMD  And when we were doing the pre-operative discussions with the surgeon, I brought up use  of PRP. And I probably said PRF at the time, but I quickly realized that almost no physician  that I've talked to has ever heard of PRF. So I said PRP and the orthopedic surgeon said, I  was like, hey, so with the repair, could you maybe lay in some PRP there to help with the  healing and strengthen everything and stuff like that? And the orthopedic surgeon said,  hey, that's a good idea. And I immediately thought to myself, why is a dentist telling an or -  thopedic surgeon what a good idea is? That seems a little bit messed up. And so then fast  forward, she has the surgery and we're in the recovery area and the doctor comes in and I  said, hey, just curious, how did it go with the PRP? And he's like, oh yeah, I'm so sorry  about that. We didn't have the centrifuge there. We didn't have the things that we needed  in order to do that. Sorry about that. And I was pretty upset about that. And unfortunately, I  only just knew about this technique. I hadn't done it yet. So I didn't have a centrifuge in my  office.  [0:24:34]  I wouldn't have known what to do. Now I do. So if ever that would have, if that would have  happened today with any of my family members that they like, oh yeah, you know, we  didn't get around to it. Then I'd be like, ah, no big deal. And I would drive them to my office  and do it right that second. And they didn't. And I have a friend who's a orthopedic surgeon  and I've talked to him about it. And it's interesting because he's like, well, you know, a lot of  the surgeons that are doing that, it's kind of considered kind of fringe right now. Okay,  weird. And I think that will change because surgeons are all about outcomes. And they do  things that help their outcomes. Surgeons aren't as much about drugs. They aren't quite as  influenced by drug companies. However, with that in mind, look for negative articles, look  for things like that. Probably funded by drug companies because this is your blood. Merck  and Pfizer can't own that as of yet anyway. So when you take someone's own blood and  do something with it to concentrate the goodness in it and stick it back in them, that's hard  for that to be controlled by Big Pharma, right?  [0:25:50]  So be aware that there will probably be some kind of hit campaigns and stuff. And I've al -  ready seen this happen with news stories about someone having a negative reaction to  stem cells or things like that. Okay, so here's PRP. That's the stuff to remember. Then we  move on to plasma rich in growth factors. And notice this is only a few years later. So  1998, this author has on this graphic where PRP is, PRGF 2001. So we still have a com -  plex protocol and we still have use of anticoagulants. Then we move forward just another  few years. So 2004 with PRF protocol easy, speed rate is fast and fast meaning the spin,  but also just how long it takes. And then use of anticoagulants is no. So this is a major im -  provement here. And we also see down here if I kind of focus on this, or actually let me  just kind of add some lines and circles here. So our leukocytes is significant in PRF, none  in PRGF, and depends in PRP. And of course that can help with some of our healing as -  pects and is really nice in the mouth because the mouth of course is exposed to bacteria  and whatnot.  [0:27:14]  09/01/25   Page   of 8   13

SSC 2.0 - 319: Regenerative TMD  So using this, the main area as I record this of PRF being used in dentistry is implants, im -  plants and extractions. And it makes all the sense in the world to put a plug and we'll talk  about that in a minute, put a plug in and then put an implant through that or to use that for  an extraction site and to maintain bone and things like that. All that makes sense. And PRF  having a higher leukocyte percentage helps with that antibacterial aspect of it. Okay. So  again, kind of maybe screen capture this, print it out, be familiar with it. But don't be sur -  prised at all when you talk to your medical colleagues and in 2025 and beyond 20 plus  years that PRF has been around and they will not even know about it. They will talk about  PRP and in my experience, it's relatively rare that they do it. When I went to the University  of Utah for my own back pain and I asked to be seen by the orthopedic surgeon that did  PRP and they said, well, that is doctor and they had one doctor in this huge group, this gi -  ant building at the University of Utah that had many, many, many orthopedic surgeons and  a bajillion care extender, you know, mid-level provider type of people.  [0:28:42]  And they had one doctor who was doing this and he was really cool. And we talked about  it and I didn't end up needing that procedure at that time. But he did say, it's like, well,  yeah, we're just not so sure and, you know, it's not covered by your insurance. And that  tends to be the big factor there, is since these procedures are not covered by insurance,  they aren't done as much. A lot of doctors won't even ask their patient if they want this or  not. Us dentists are different. So this is why dentists are really leading the field in neuro -  generative medicine for normal people, that is. Again, a lot of doctors that are treating  high-level athletes and treating executives and treating people who time is money. And so  the adage there will be, well, how much would it cost you to be out of work for three weeks  in recovery? Well, tens of thousands of dollars. Okay, great. Here, I'll do this procedure for  you for 10 grand. And that's going to save you a ton of money. And there's people that are  well-heeled and they're able to do stuff like that. Dentists are providing these options to  people that aren't necessarily rich people. And just giving that as an option.  [0:29:53]  Hey, you're going to get your wisdom teeth out. This is the fee for that. For 250 bucks, we  can do PRF. And that'll help with the healing. That'll reduce the pain. It'll make it way less  likely, if not completely unlikely, for them to have a dry socket. Stuff like that. And patients  tend to say yes. So if you are doing any dental procedures of a surgical nature, you should  for sure be doing PRF. Even if you are at this stage of the game, not doing much in TMJ  problems, you should be doing PRF for other dental issues. However, I hope by the end of  this section here, you will want to get on board and help people with TMJ problems as  well.  Goals of Regenerative Medicine   [0:30:32]  09/01/25   Page   of 9   13

SSC 2.0 - 319: Regenerative TMD  So what are the goals of regenerative medicine? Well, to regenerate, of course. But then  just our normal goals. Reduce pain, improve function, improve a sense of well-being,  which comes from reduced pain and improved function. And also, you know, just the idea  that the patient has that we're making things better. It's not just stabilizing it or keeping it  from getting worse slower. It is regenerating. So that is the goal of regenerative medicine.  Natural Healing Stimulation   [0:31:04]  So PRF is stimulating natural healing. Does this through cellular proliferation. It does this  through cellular proliferation, enhanced tissue regeneration, and promoting angiogenesis,  or new blood vessel formation in the area. Now this slide points out one of the best as -  pects of regenerative medicine techniques, and particularly PRF. Because this is the pa -  tient's own material, it's autologous, there is basically no chance of allergic reaction. Now  keep that in mind when comparing to PRGF and PRP. What do those have in it that PRF  doesn't? Well, that anticoagulant, right? Could someone have a reaction to the anticoagu -  lant? Absolutely they can. So with PRF, you're very, very safe. As a matter of fact, there  are very few, we'll get to these towards the end, but there are very few contraindications to  PRF. The beauty also is that we're able to do things without surgery. We don't have to  make cuts and go in. You just go in with a needle, put the material in the area that you  want to have that healing process occur, and that's pretty much it. So as far as the inva -  siveness goes, it's very, very minimal. And also the idea of having to use even allografts or  the patient's own tissues and whatnot is becoming less and less.  [0:32:29]  This is being used in periodontal disease and instead of doing grafting like free gingival  grafts and things like that that I was taught to do in dental school, by using these princi -  ples, a lot less of that is having to be done and you can use other materials to encourage  this healing rather than the intrusive nature and invasive nature of taking off palatal tissue  and things like that that we've done in the past.  Anti-Inflammatory & Analgesic Effects   [0:32:58]  Now let's talk about some of the individual cells that are in this PRF matrix and how they  improve inflammation and improve analgesia. So TGF-beta is transforming growth factor  beta and it's a multifunctional cytokine that plays a crucial role in regulating various cellular  functions including cell growth, differentiation, and immune responses. Platelet-derived  growth factor, or PDGF, is one among numerous growth factors that regulate cell growth  and division. In particular, PDGF plays a significant role in blood vessel formation. The an -  giogenesis that we talked about on the last slide or rather the growth of blood vessels from  already existing blood vessel tissues. It's also involved in mitogenesis or the proliferation  09/01/25   Page   of 10   13

SSC 2.0 - 319: Regenerative TMD  of mesenchymal cells such as fibroblasts, osteoblasts, pterocytes, vascular smooth mus -  cle cells, and mesenchymal stem cells as well as chemotaxis or the directed migration of  mesenchymal cells. So PDGF does a lot of different things.  [0:34:04]  Vascular endothelial growth factor, or VEGF, originally known as vascular permeability fac -  tor, is a signal protein produced by many cells that stimulates the formation of blood ves -  sels. To be specific, VEGF is a subfamily of growth factors, the platelet-derived growth fac -  tor family of cysteine knot growth factors. They are important signaling proteins involved in  both vasculogenesis and angiogenesis. It is part of the system that restores the oxygen  supply to tissues when blood circulation is inadequate, such as in hypoxic conditions. IGF,  or insulin-like growth factor, are proteins with high sequence similarity to insulin. IGFs are  part of a complex system that cells use to communicate with their physiologic environment.  This complex system consists of two cell-surface receptors, two ligands, a family of seven  high-affinity IGF-binding proteins, as well as associated IGF-beta protein-degrading en -  zymes, referred to collectively as proteases, as well as associated IGF-BP-degrading en -  zymes, referred to collectively as proteases. Now, having gone through all that stuff, and if  you're like me, it gives you a little PTSD of learning about these things back in physiology  and biochemistry. And I don't know about you at your school, but we kind of blew through  that stuff pretty quick.  [0:35:36]  And I know what these things are to a degree. I've heard the names, let's put it that way.  But if you gave me a quiz, even after I have just gone over this slide with you of what do  these things individually do, I'm not going to be that confident. I'm just not. And maybe you  are. Maybe you just were a whiz in biochemistry and whatnot. I was definitely not. And  these are also not things we use on a regular basis. So you might get this study, read it.  This is one of the reasons I also have Rick Myron's book is to go through that. So Miron  and Choukroun, their book on using PRF in dentistry is excellent. And it goes into detail on  all of the different growth factors that are involved there. And I think that is helpful for us to  go through, again, for just our conversations amongst our colleagues and those that are in  this field.  Accelerated Healing in Dental Applications   [0:36:32]  Once again, using these materials in dentistry has been shown to improve osseointegra -  tion of implants. This is why I mentioned that if you're doing implants at all, you really, real -  ly need to be doing this. Supporting soft and hard tissue regeneration after extractions, si -  nus lifts, cyst removal, and reducing post-op complications and discomfort. There is just  flat out no reason you shouldn't be doing   this as a restorative dentist if you are doing any -  thing from extractions, which of course you are, to implant placement, to peri-o surgeries,  just absolutely something you could be using every day in your practice. As an option to  09/01/25   Page   of 11   13

SSC 2.0 - 319: Regenerative TMD  the patient, if you're not doing it now, you know what to expect from those procedures. But  I promise this will be one of the fastest ROI things that you will ever have in your practice.  Because as you let people know, hey, this is available. This is regenerative medicine stuff.  This is kind of cutting edge. This is what athletes get when they get injured. World-class  athletes get this when they're injured. And we're providing this for you now. And it's X. Talk  about this towards the end, but just plug it in right here. Your cost, centrifuge, $2,500 to  $3,000 maybe. The tubes themselves, the really expensive ones are maybe $3 to $5.  Then you've got to get the blood draw. Depending on the state that you're in, that may be  anything from super easy to rather complicated. In our practices in Idaho and Utah, we  have minimum two people that are always trained in our office to do blood draws.  [0:38:05]  We send them to community college courses to become phlebotomists. And those are typ -  ically 12-week courses, sometimes a little shorter, sometimes a little longer. But why 12  weeks? That means like Tuesday, Thursday evenings. It's not that they got to take off work  for four months and go do that. It is just a couple nights a week in order for them to do  that. And they will learn all sorts of stuff in that course way beyond just drawing blood. A lot  of stuff that they won't need, but their confidence level will be very high. So that's what we  do. The reason we have two, by the way, is so that if the first person has a problem getting  the stick, then they can pass the baton to their colleague. And if that colleague can't get  the blood draw either, then it's very clear to the patient, or it should be clear to the patient,  that they're the problem, not us, right? If you only have one person and they miss a blood  draw, they miss a stick, then sometimes they can get kind of frustrated or lose their confi -  dence. So you want to have two people on your staff doing this.  Application in Chronic TMD   [0:39:12]  So now let's talk about the application in chronic TMJ problems. So we've talked about the  use of these regenerative techniques in TMD and gaining popularity, and then in just kind  of all aspects of dentistry. Again, why that is, is the safety profile is very strong, and the  clinical success that people are having already at this point is just building and building  and building on itself, and people are having these great experiences and outcomes. In  our practices, we've done more at this point joint injections than probably any individual  practice in the world. And the kind of crazy thing is it's extremely rare for a patient to not  feel better. There's nothing else we've ever done in our career that everyone got better.  That's statistically unlikely to have everyone get better. And I don't mean that everyone has  changes in their cone beam CT of their joint if they've got degenerative arthritis. We don't  see that every time. But as far as reduced pain and improved function, that's happening  literally every time. I have been the recipient of PRF injections, my wife has been the recip -  ient of PRF injections, and we got better with those PRF injections. So this is happening  over and over and over and over and over and over and over again and if you just think  09/01/25   Page   of 12   13

SSC 2.0 - 319: Regenerative TMD  about, again, this basic science that we're going through, it makes sense. We're just con -  centrating those healing factors and putting it into the body.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 13   13

