SSC 2.0 - 321: PRF from TMD  SSC 2.0   Level 3  321: PRF from TMD  [intro music]  Who Knows PRF?   [0:00:12]  Now, one of the common confusions when I bring up PRF at big lectures is I will say, hey,  how many of you are familiar with PRF? And I usually say PRF, by the way, not PRP. So I'll  say PRF because PRF is more commonly used in dentistry. And there will be maybe 5% of  the room will raise their hand, usually less. And then I'll say, "What are you using that for?"  And they'll say, "Well, we're using it for implants in our practice or we're using it for extrac -  tions." And then I will go on to show them what we're doing in the jaw joint. And I can tell  that they're a little confused. And the reason they look confused is because they are using  plugs or sometimes called slugs, which the reason called slug is it looks like a slug. So this  is where there has been exposure to the air to allow a clot to occur. And then using that  PRF clot or matrix in order to put it into different shapes and you can put into a cylinder  and you can turn it flat and you can do all sorts of cool stuff with it and treat it as a tissue in  and of itself. It's really neat how you can do that. But I can see that the dentists in the room  are confused because they're like, well, how are you going to inject that slug, that plug ma -  terial into the jaw joint? Well, that's because we aren't. So we're using injectable PRF ver -  sus these slugs.  Injectable PRF (I-PRF)   [0:01:37]  So injectable PRF, as has been mentioned already, we don't have the anticoagulant and  the tubes are sealed. So they are protected from the air. And after centrifugation, you're  just simply going to draw up that PRF into the syringe and then inject it. So we don't spend  a lot of time on this. There needs to be sent to the centrifuge very, very quickly. Once sep -  aration occurs, we have a little bit of time with that, but we're not allowing this centrifuge  material to have significant contact with the air.  PRF “Plugs” (or Slugs)   [0:02:16]  The PRF plug or slug, on the other hand, is allowed to have exposure to the air and allows  that to create this gel-like or polymerized form that can then be manipulated and used for  09/01/25   Page   of 1   15

SSC 2.0 - 321: PRF from TMD  various purposes almost as a tissue in and of itself. Very, very cool. Obviously, we're not  using this in TMJ, though, [chuckle] because we're not injecting this into the jaw joint. So  these are used in implants and extraction sites and in periodontal surgeries and things like  that.  Comparative Efficacy: I-PRF vs PRP   [0:02:54]  Now, I've talked about this on some of our previous slides here, but in taking some of  these studies that are doing the comparisons between arthrocentesis, hyaluronic acid, and  all these different treatments, looking at PRP versus PRF, remember that PRP is fast. It's  the hare. PRF is the tortoise and there does seem to be some evidence that PRF for TMJ  problems is a little bit better than PRP, and that's perhaps due to this fibrin matrix and  those healing tissues being trapped in that area and then been released over a longer pe -  riod of time. Nevertheless, I would take PRP over steroid any day of the week. PRF does  just seem to be a little bit better, and of course, this is what we're using. This is what you  will learn to use.  Potential of PRF in TMJ Disorder: Condylar Regeneration   [0:03:44]  Now, of course, we need to talk about the use of PRF for regeneration of the temporal  mandibular joint. And this 2023 study states, while direct evidence of PRF inducing condy -  lar regeneration is limited, its regenerative properties suggest potential benefits. PRF's  ability to promote osteogenic differentiation and bone tissue formation indicates its promise  in supporting condylar regeneration in TMJ disorders.  [0:04:10]  And indeed, this is the fact because we have seen this over and over again. So let me go  through a few cases, and I have these in other sections in Spencer Study Club, but just  want to go over this here again to reinforce the results we're having. Now, all of these cas -  es that you're about to see with the before and afters are using fixed angle centrifuges and  usually three to four weeks in between three sessions of PRF. That is our typical protocol.  There's one here that will be a little bit different than that that I'll talk about, but that's our  typical protocol. And by the time you're watching this, and this could be years from once  I've recorded this, we will have many, many, many more cases, and maybe we're doing  things a little bit different. Again, that's the exciting aspect of this in staying tuned to what  are the best practices.  [0:05:07]  However, using this technique, you're going to see amazing results. And if you only did  this, if you only did it the way we are doing it at this point, you're going to have amazing  results. All right, so here we go. And just to point out some anatomy here.  09/01/25   Page   of 2   15

SSC 2.0 - 321: PRF from TMD  [0:05:23]  So here, of course, we have the condyle in a coronal aspect, and you see that it's very dif -  ficult to see the cortical plate, whereas with the after, it is clear cortical plate back. This is  the same cone beam CT, by the way. It's another case. We had a subchondral cyst, that  little area there, that hole in the condyle that's called a subchondral cyst. And that was  filled in after the three sessions of PRF. Another case, we have a little bit of a defect here,  and the cortical bone is not distinct. And then fast forward here, a repair of that defect, and  the cortical plate is more distinct. In this case, another kind of a hole in the cortical plate  there, and then that is put back in. Now, something else that I have noticed in going  through these different images, and here this kind of shows up really nice, is do you notice  anything else around this joint here or in this picture other than the bone? And then we can  start looking for this on the other ones too, or maybe I'll go back and we'll look at that as  well. Do you notice the space around the condyle is greater here?  [0:06:46]  So you can see that we have a little more space around the condyle. Let's go back and  see the same thing. So in this one, I'm not seeing a big difference there in the joint space.  That filled-in bone has taken that space there and made it look a little bit more narrow ac -  tually on the after because we have more bone there. Going back a little bit more, here we  have a filled-in defect and a very similar again with the space in the fossa. Going back  again, so here's another one where we have the cortical plate, very obvious. And in this  one, it does seem like there's a little bit more space there between the condyle and the top  of the fossa. So another example from the sagittal cut there, we see just kind of a break -  down of the cortical plate and then here it is returned. Once again, if we look at this joint, I  don't necessarily see a huge difference in the soft tissue. What I'm getting at here is we're  looking at bone obviously in these images, but clearly the soft tissue is being healed as  well. And so I think in some cases you may see a change in that joint space.  [0:08:05]  Now one would think that that would potentially cause a change in the occlusion. And in -  deed it might. And that is something that I want us to be aware of. And again, we have  probably more than 1,000 cases under our belts just in our offices and then extrapolate  that to everyone in Spencer Study Club and we're talking multiple thousand cases. So far,  as of this recording, no one has mentioned or no one has noted a bite change, a posterior  open bite because of an increased space in the jaw joint. I do think that's possible though.  So I think as we talk about all the time that it's important to get your patient's consent, help  them understand this, help them understand that as that joint regenerates, it's possible  that could move their jaw a little bit and their jaw joint is attached to their lower teeth. And if  that jaw joint changes position, it's possible that their bite could change a little bit and they  may need some fine tuning of their occlusion or maybe even orthodontics or something  like that. So just keep that in mind. Again, not something that we are seeing on a regular  basis or frankly at all at this point does not mean that we're not going to start seeing it.  [0:09:22]  09/01/25   Page   of 3   15

SSC 2.0 - 321: PRF from TMD  Another case here, in this case, it almost looks like it's a little bit different here with the joint  space, but once again, we see a little bit of a defect in the condyle, a little bite has been  taken out of the top of the condyle, and then that is filled in, cortical plate is coming back.  Dr. Tanya Kushner’s Case   [0:09:39]  All right, now this is a rather dramatic case. This is Dr. Tanya Kushner, has a practice in  the Silverdale, Washington area, kind of the Tacoma, greater Seattle area there. And  here's the story. So this patient came in and this is the initial cone beam CT that was tak -  en. She had pain and dysfunction and Dr. Kushner treated the patient with traditional splint  therapy. The patient had a splint during the day, she had a splint at night, was wearing  those to unload the joint, to change any type of parafunctional behavior during the day. It's  kind of the typical stuff that we will do. And the patient responded very well to traditional  therapy. And then after being stable for a while and weaning off the splint during the day,  she was wearing something at night, but she came back having pain again.  [0:10:31]  Dr. Kushner decided to take another cone beam CT to see if something had changed and  she saw this. So that previous film was from May of '22, this is February of '23. And that is  some massive change in the condyle. If we go back here, we don't really see even a hint  of this starting or this happening, other than we have this breakdown at the top of the  condyle here. But clearly to go from there to here in that relatively short period of time is  massive. Now, had you shown me this film back in 2015, let's say, I would have said, oh  my goodness, that's terrible. And if that patient is having a lot of pain, then this could actu -  ally be a surgical case. And I've been kind of anti-surgery, open joint surgery, for a long,  long, long time. Where that came from is sending my patients for open joint surgery and  them getting worse. And that happened. I only sent three patients, but in all three cases,  they got worse, including the patient who had already had bilateral joint replacement, had  that fixed or redone by a world-renowned oral surgeon in Texas, and that patient got worse  after that procedure.  [0:11:53]  And that was very disturbing to me and very difficult for the patient, obviously, far more dif -  ficult for her than for me. But I basically said, I'm done with sending people for surgery.  And I know that there's been lots of people that have had successful surgeries, and that's  great. And I know that the surgeons that are out there doing that, I don't put any blame on  them because they're just trying to help people. So back to this case, this might have been  a case that Dr. Kushner or others would have looked at and said I think surgery is going to  be our option. However, Dr. Kushner thought, well, why don't we try PRF in this case?  Can't hurt. And that's a really key, important point right there is we don't have any evidence  of injecting someone's own blood product back into them is going to cause any problem.  So the it can't hurt is correct, and it could only help. So she does three sessions of PRF  09/01/25   Page   of 4   15

SSC 2.0 - 321: PRF from TMD  and gives that patient a little time. The pain goes away. Dr. Kushner gets another film and  sees this, that defect completely filled in.  [0:13:05]  Now, again, I am recording this in 2025, and at the end of '24, I remember Dr. Kushner  reaching out to me and saying, hey, I got a follow-up film on this patient a year later. So  recently, she's telling me about this at the end of 2024, and she said, yeah, I was kind of  holding my breath a little bit because we've been showing this case. We've been showing  this to our colleagues, and it's pretty miraculous, and I was hoping, my goodness, I hope  that this is stable, and indeed, here it is at a year later, and we start seeing that cortical  plate coming back as a normal condyle. If I was to have started with that image and to put  these all on one screen here, if I showed you or anyone else this image here, we would  just think that's pretty much a normal condyle. An amazing case, all documented by Dr.  Kushner, Spencer Study Club member. You can have the same sort of results.  Dr. Kevin Mangelson’s Case   [0:14:07]  Now, one more case is Dr. Mangelson, my partner in our Salt Lake practice, had a patient  reach out, and the reason there's a plane on the slide here is because she had to fly in.  Now, she had a jaw problem for many years. She was in significant pain. She was saying  that it was a six to eight on a zero to burn-to-live scale on the right side. She'd had splint  therapy before. She was currently doing Invisalign for her jaw pain. I don't think that that's  ever a thing, that you're going to change the patient's occlusion by microns or perhaps a  millimeter or so, and that's going to get rid of their jaw pain. That makes no sense when  you think about it from a 1% occlusion perspective. Nevertheless, she's trying all sorts of  stuff, goes to Mayo Clinic.  [0:14:49]  I believe in Minnesota. I'm not positive on that part, but she goes to Mayo Clinic. Could  have been the one in Arizona, is my point there, and she gets told that she's going to need  bilateral joint replacement because these are her joints. Now, I've been doing this a long  time, and these are the gnarliest jaw joints I've ever seen, or this is just the right side that  we're looking at here, but this is awful. This is legit awful, and out of thousands upon thou -  sands of joint images that I've seen in my career, these are the worst, and this patient was  in a ton of pain.  [0:15:34]  For her to be told, you're going to need joint replacement, actually pretty reasonable, pretty  reasonable. Again, if you just showed me those films, and if you had shown me those films  in 2019, I would have agreed that there were no options for her other than joint replace -  ment. Now, if you remember back in level three in the advanced TMD section there, what  we would have done in that case is done a joint injection of local anesthetic to make sure  we could get the pain to go away before we would send her for surgery. We would do  09/01/25   Page   of 5   15

SSC 2.0 - 321: PRF from TMD  those diagnostic injections to make sure that that was actually going to get rid of the pain,  but now come to 2025, and this patient was offered PRF. She, again, sought us out, flew to  the Salt Lake area so that she could get that treatment. The reason she didn't go forward  with the bilateral joint replacement was because she couldn't afford it. It was going to be  over $100,000 out of pocket, and so she was looking for alternatives that weren't going to  cost so much, and obviously a plane ticket to come out to Salt Lake a few times wasn't go -  ing to cost her nearly as much.  [0:16:47]  So he did PRF on this patient in the standard model, Now, since the patient was traveling,  he didn't give her a splint immediately, because that would have been just a little bit more  of a hassle to manage her using splint therapy since she was not local to us, but decided  to add a splint at the third PRF injection. Partly that was because after the second injec -  tion, she did report improvement, but not to the level that most of our patients do. We've  gotten used to most patients being significantly better after the first PRF injection, and she  said, eh, I'm a little better. And then after the second injection, she said, well, yeah, I'm  feeling a little better, a little better than I was before, still having pain. So Dr. Mangelson  thought, you know what, we really need the crutches in this case to give her every chance  possible to heal, and so he added that at the third injection. After the third injection, a few  weeks after that, with the combination of the splint therapy, she was pain-free. Not pain  reduced, but pain-free.  [0:17:58]  He then got her back in for follow-up, and these are the images 12 weeks after that third  PRF session, and to put the originals. Now, these original CBCTs were not taken in our of -  fice, so it's not the exact same machine. However, you can see one of our concerns in this  case was with this kind of gnarly breakdown and then even additional bone in the fossa  there growing off the top of the fossa. We were concerned that maybe you put in all these  growth factors and stuff, and where the bone was growing that it shouldn't be growing,  maybe that would continue to grow, and that that would be potentially worse, and that isn't  what happened. So rather miraculous to know that when you give the body the healing  pieces that it needs, it knows how to heal. So in the area of the fossa where there was ex -  tra bone, that bone is kind of going away. It's going back towards normal. On the condyle  where we had all these little bits and pieces and little floating pieces of bone, the floating  pieces of bone no longer visible, and all of the roughness smooth.  [0:19:13]  And as of this recording, this patient is still doing really, really well. This is really exciting,  and we have seen other patients now who have been told that their only hope is joint re -  placement surgery, and so far, these patients have been significantly helped with PRF to  the point that they are not seeking surgery anymore. Pretty awesome.  Potential of PRF in TMJ Disorders   [0:19:37]  09/01/25   Page   of 6   15

SSC 2.0 - 321: PRF from TMD  So just a few more studies on using PRF in temporomandibular joint disorders. This study  from 2024 says that injectable PRF, IPRF, demonstrated efficacy in managing TMJ disor -  ders. Studies have shown that IPRF significantly reduces TMJ pain intensity, improves  function, and enhances patient-reported outcomes. Furthermore, injectable PRF has been  effective in treating TMJ internal derangements, that popping and clicking, improving max -  imum interstitial opening, and reducing clinical dysfunction scores. In other words, in -  jectable PRF is awesome for all things of a TMJ nature.  Dr. Brian Briesemeister’s Case   [0:20:13]  And we know that this healing is not just limited to the bone. We've shown a bunch of cone  beam CTs, but you may remember this case from another section here, and this is Dr. Bri -  an Briesemeister, one of our Spencer Study Club members who got in on PRF at basically  the same time all of us embraced this and in this case, he had a patient who he believed  might have a non-reducing disc displacement. She presented with limited opening, a little  deflection, and pain in the jaw joint, and the history led him to believe that this patient likely  had a non-reducing disc displacement. So he sent her for an MRI. What he found was that  the patient did not have a non-reducing disc displacement, but as you see, the disc is in  place, and the arrow here is pointing to a hole in the disc. After seeing that the patient did  not have a non-reducing displacement, Brian clearly decided, well I'm not going to do an  unlocking, she's not locked, but he found on the MRI that the patient had a hole in her disc  and the patient had pain, so indication for PRF. He did two sessions of PRF and then the  patient was feeling much, much better and decided that she didn't want to have the third  injection. I think how Brian was doing it at that point was he was charging for these indi -  vidual sessions and the patient decided she didn't want to have the third session.  [0:21:43]  Most of us at this point, we charge for a package deal so they're not paying more for addi -  tional injections. But anyway, the patient's like, you know what, let's get a follow-up MRI,  make sure that this is actually doing something before we do that third injection. And  here's what they found on the follow-up MRI after just two injections. What you're seeing  here is that disc, those arrows once again pointing to where the hole used to be, and now  no hole. To read the radiologist's report on the pre-treatment report, the radiologist said  suspicion for an incomplete tear within the posterior horn of the meniscus near the thinner  central gland, suggested on sagittal images four and five. So a hole in the condyle, basi -  cally. Then on the post-PRF treatment, again just two sessions, I'll read this whole thing,  intermittent signal intensity is now seen within the normal positioned right articular disc,  central portion and posterior band, without attenuation, with suggestion of partial thickness  tearing as was seen on previous MRI. Likely representing interval granulation, tissue/scar,  09/01/25   Page   of 7   15

SSC 2.0 - 321: PRF from TMD  suggestive of ongoing healing. Amazing. If you would have told me back in 2019, 2020,  that it was possible to heal a disc, I would have thought you were crazy.  [0:23:07]  There's never been anything that says that you can heal a disc. When we were doing pro -  lotherapy and stuff like that, we never saw cases where a disc was healed. I never had  any of my mentors ever talk about something like that. Now we're seeing this with PRF.  Just awesome.  Practical Considerations and Clinical Protocols  Patient Selection Criteria   [0:23:24]  So let's wrap things up with some practical considerations and clinical protocols. First, pa -  tient selection. Well, we could thank people that are unresponsive to our typical TMD  treatments and conservative care. However, as I have bolded here, this is becoming in -  creasingly first-line therapy. And going back to the model of treating your patients as you  would treat a loved one, that's what I would do. If I had my own child start having TMJ pain  or dysfunction, I'm going straight to the PRF. I really am. Now, partly with our patients in a  practice like mine that is limited to TMD and sleep, oftentimes the simple stuff has already  been tried. The patient has taken Advil, for example. They've used ice and moist heat.  Maybe they've gone to a physical therapist or a chiropractor or something like that. So of -  tentimes, by the time a patient comes to someone like you or me, they've already tried  those simple things.  [0:24:35]  If they haven’t, it certainly wouldn't hurt to try something. But really dig into their history. If  this is the first time in their life and they're 45 years old and they've never had a problem  with their jaw before, okay. Maybe that doesn't mean that we need to draw their blood and  spin it and put it back into them. On the other hand, if this is something that comes and  goes, and they've had multiple events over the years and sequela of this pain and dys -  function returning, I would definitely do PRF in that case because there may be some un -  derlying problem that needs to completely heal that hasn't been able to. Clearly, if they  have a chronic problem, we would go straight to PRF in conjunction with splint therapy. So  I really believe, and as you go back into even level one of Spencer Study Club and in level  three, and I keep bringing this up over and over and over again, that things like retrodisci -  tis that we would historically treat with a temporary splint, an aqualizer, something like that,  and some Advil and maybe some physical therapy. I'm strongly leaning towards doing PRF  right up front with that case because I want to heal the tissue as best as possible.  [0:25:57]  If we have some inflammation going on that can cause breakdown, and maybe it's difficult  to get that breakdown to come back to normal. Regeneration implies regeneration, right?  09/01/25   Page   of 8   15

SSC 2.0 - 321: PRF from TMD  So we're making things come back. However, it seems to me just intuitively obvious that  it's better to avoid the breakdown in the first place. So you might consider more broadly  how you can use this than more narrowly. And even though it does involve an injection,  and by definition that is invasive, this is a minimally invasive procedure. I'm a fan. Probably  if you're going to tell me, hey, Jamison, I'm using PRF in this case, it's probably going to be  pretty rare as of this recording that I'm going to say, yeah, you don't need it. That's overkill.  You're doing too much. I don't think that I'm going to say that.  Contraindications   [0:26:52]  Now, having said that, there are some contraindications, but nothing special making these  contraindications for PRF. These are just contraindications for people for giving them a  shot. So bleeding disorders, anticoagulant therapy, active infection or systemic illness,  immunocompromised, or recent use of NSAIDs. Now, the recent use of NSAIDs, the only  reason that's really a contraindication is that their immune system is going to be inhibited  by the NSAIDs, by the anti-inflammatories.  [0:27:27]  So typically we don't want to give NSAIDs when we are creating an inflammatory reaction  and healing process. Now, having said that, you can use Tylenol, which is not an anti-in -  flammatory, and that could help with their pain. So if you do need to use a medication, then  you could use Tylenol. You could use a narcotic. I hope you would not do that or you would  not need to do that. The PRF is going to give them a lot of pain relief really fast. So bottom  line, just the typical contraindications are if they've got bleeding disorders, things like that,  infections, don't be dumb. But otherwise, really there aren't any contraindications.  Cost, Consent, and Insurance/Reimbursement   [0:28:13]  So let's talk briefly about cost, consent, insurance reimbursement, things like that. So the  typical for this, as of this recording, is around $500 to $2,000 per session. And that would  depend on where this is being done. So for us in our practice, as you'll see in a second,  we're currently charging around $400 per injection. We typically will do three sessions, as  I've said before. However, this is changing, and we are looking at doing more of a case fee  where the regenerative medicine, the regenerative TMJ therapy is really what the patient's  paying for, and then the splints are almost thrown in as crutches as part of this treatment.  [0:29:05]  And that treatment may be $4,000 or something like that for the entire package. So there's  different ways to do this, but also part of the numbers that I have on this slide here are re -  lated to knee injections, spinal injections. I know people that are doing injections into the  vertebrae and whatnot and vertebral discs for as much as $10,000. Usually those will in -  09/01/25   Page   of 9   15

SSC 2.0 - 321: PRF from TMD  volve exosomes, things like that. The company I went to in Salt Lake for my back pain that  luckily I did not need to have treated, but when I went there, their package deal was going  to be $8,500, and that involved like five different sessions, three of those sessions being  PRP, and then two of those sessions being other techniques. So that kind of gives you a  range. I would look at other people in your community to see what is being done with that.  However, remember that people are not paying you for an injection. And I know with med -  ical billing and whatnot, it always goes down to a code and a fee, and that's terrible be -  cause no one is coming to you for you to take their blood out of their arms, spin it in a cen -  trifuge, and stick it back into them.  [0:30:19]  They're coming to you for an outcome. They're coming to you to get out of pain. If I would  have done that $8,500 group of procedures for my back pain, it would have been to get  out of back pain. It would definitely not have been because I wanted them to do these  things and inject stuff into my back. Heaven forbid, had they been able to give me a pill or  something or just wave a magic wand and get rid of my back pain, I would have given  $8,500 for that. So it's the outcome that all of our patients are paying for. These therapies  are typically not covered by insurance in the United States and probably unlikely anywhere  else. This will, I hope, change over time because these are very affordable things for in -  surance to pay for that would result in patients being less likely to have surgery. I've  brought up Dr. Tallick a few times. Again, used to be a spinal surgeon. Now he only does  PRF and has told me that 80% of the patients that he sees would have had surgery be -  fore, and now they're able to be treated non-surgically just with the PRF injections. Imag -  ine that, 80% of these patients not needing surgery anymore. You would think that insur -  ance companies and self-insured companies would think that that's important. And we'll  see if they do or not.  Informed Consent Form   [0:31:42]  On informed consent, here's our informed consent form, and this will be in your library as  well, but please make this your own and take care of this. But let me kind of go through  this with you. It's very similar or exactly the same as our informed consent for any other  joint injection that we would do. So it says, I, patient puts their name there, have been ad -  vised and consulted about PRF. I've been advised that PRF is an established treatment  technique used to treat degenerative joint disease and myofascial pain dysfunction. PRF  therapy uses platelets harvested from blood, thereby ensuring no foreign disease trans -  mission or injection, and allows for the body to heal itself naturally. I have been informed  that the risks and complications of PRF are pain at the injection site, swelling, bruising,  dizziness or fainting, headache during or after injections, injury to the nerve and or muscle,  infection from the injection. There may be no effect from treatment, temporary or perma -  nent nerve paralysis, nausea, vomiting, itching at the injection sites, bleeding.  09/01/25   Page   of 10   15

SSC 2.0 - 321: PRF from TMD  [0:32:40]  I understand this procedure is not covered by insurance and I'm responsible for the total  charge myself. I understand results vary and are not guaranteed. Three sessions are indi -  cated to start at $3.95 per session, totaling $1,185. So that as of the time that was written,  that's what we're doing. And our case acceptance for PRF approaches 100%. People love  the idea of regenerative medicine. They love the idea of their body healing itself naturally.  They love the aspect that all of this is natural. It is their stuff just made better to put back  into them. So our informed consent is appropriate and goes through some of these things.  And by the way, of all of these different potential side effects, knock on wood, we haven't  had infection. We haven't had really any negative side effects of these injections over the  years of the thousands that we've done. There will be patients that are kind of freaked out  from the injection every once in a while who will kind of act like they're about to faint. Typi -  cally, that's not something that we've maybe had that happen a couple times in 25 years  that someone's actually fainted. But that's pretty rare using the same techniques.  [0:33:54]  If you go back into the injections outside the deep dark hole, just remember those tech -  niques of putting them down, not quite Trendelenburg necessarily, but getting their head  lowered so that they have good blood flow to their brain and that will help out. The injection  itself, by the way, is not painful. If you haven't had this done for yourself, anesthetic hurts  when it's injected because it's acidic and the PRF is neutral. So it really doesn't hurt at all.  I've had this done in multiple spots in my body and the injection itself can be uncomfort -  able, but the material being injected is not uncomfortable.  Risks and Side Effects   [0:34:33]  Your risks and side effects with PRF injections are the same with any injection. And so our  biggest thing, of course, is just sterile or clean technique. Normally we won't be completely  sterile, but I would not be opposed to you literally using iodine and iodine-like substances  to make the area sterile, draping, stuff like that, that will actually improve the patient's ex -  perience because it will be more of a big deal medical procedure and there will probably  be some placebo effect included in that and there's nothing wrong with that at all. So just  be smart with your technique and everything will be fine.  Future Directions and Research Needs  Standardization of PRP/PRF Preparations   [0:35:11]  And let's end on future directions, research needs, and combination therapy with PRP. So  as have already been discussed, standardization of PRP, PRF preparations, and protocols  09/01/25   Page   of 11   15

SSC 2.0 - 321: PRF from TMD  should be accomplished. This is something that we're actively involved in and so as you  are working as a member of Spencer Study Club, you're going to get the latest in protocols  and we're all going to learn from each other and I do expect there to be a formula for how  to best do this for most people. Remember though, going back on that, it's not as much  about the exact time but more the look that you're going for because remember there's dif -  ferentiation in the blood itself. I kind of think of it like baking a cake perhaps. There is a  recipe and it's very specific, but if your oven is at 7,000 feet versus 2,000 feet or there's  other little variations, that can make a big deal. So I remember my mom, whenever she  was making a cake or something, after the time had finished, she would take a toothpick  and stick it into the cake and see if it came out clean so she'd know it was done.  [0:36:28]  And if it did not come out clean, she'd let it cook a little bit longer, wouldn't she? Same type  of thing. What your goal is, and this is why it's important that you take proper training, is  not just to follow the script of this long with this type of centrifuge so you know you've got  the right force and whatnot, but it's what is that product to look like. Nevertheless, some  standardization is definitely on its way.  Biomarkers for Treatment Success   [0:36:54]  Biomarkers for treatment success and going over all of what we're trying to accomplish.  This is in process. Really, our group is leading the way in this and showing what can be  done with regeneration of the bone itself, with the disc, with other tissues. We are leading  the way in that. PRP's role in regenerative surgery, we have hit over and over again, and  there are so many different areas that this is being used in dentistry, and the future is very  bright.  Potential for Combination Therapies   [0:37:24]  Potential for combination therapies include PRP plus hyaluronic acid. This is interesting.  So hyaluronic acid has been shown to improve lubrication of the joint and then the PRF  improving the healing. We have not done this yet as of this recording where we are com -  bining these two things, but it makes sense.  [0:37:44]  Hyaluronic acid is also not terribly expensive. So this may be something that we're looking  at in the future. However, so far PRF by itself has been giving us amazing results as we've  discussed. Arthrocentesis plus PRP or PRF we've already discussed as well and that also  seems to be better than arthrocentesis by itself which makes all the sense in the world.  Here to repeat myself, I would consider this if you had a patient that was in tremendous  pain, had a very acute problem, their retrodiscitis was just kind of out of control, they had a  09/01/25   Page   of 12   15

SSC 2.0 - 321: PRF from TMD  big old open bite, when they try to put their teeth together they're just dying, that might be  a good case to flush out all of those inflammatory products with arthrocentesis using that  two net needle technique, flush that out with lactated ringers and then put in your PRF.  Probably the patient's going to have a better pain relief, quicker pain relief and a better  outcome if you do that. So keep that in mind for specific patients.  [0:38:47]  PRP plus stem cell therapy or exosomes is also very exciting. We are getting into this cur -  rently. The only problem if you will with stem cells and exosomes is just increased ex -  pense.Also the where do you get them from and that can bring some questions into the  procedure. So again currently as of this filming we are PRF pretty much exclusively. How -  ever I absolutely see a route of using exosomes stem cells as these things are more  commonly used and as prices come down and quality is more certain and the consistency  of that quality is more certain I can absolutely see us doing these things for specific rea -  sons in the future.  [0:39:36]  PRP and low level laser therapy or red light therapy are very exciting and this is something  that we are doing in our office. We have a red light unit there for us to use with the patient.  Red light has been shown to improve the quality of the blood if it is used prior to the  venipuncture and then also in the healing itself. As of this recording we have little units, red  light units that our patients can buy and we also have these big units that are about this  big or so and the patients can buy those as well. I use this at my home. My wife uses this.  There are many many many areas of red light where red light therapy is helpful including  sleep, healing, skin, all sorts of stuff that is awesome with this and TMJ pain, muscu -  loskeletal pain in general.  [0:40:38]  So I strongly encourage you to learn more about this. We have a session in level three  here with Dr. Rahul Desai and a couple sessions of him that we've taken from Zoom meet -  ings that he gave for us and you can learn a lot about the basic science of red light therapy  and then some of the applications of that. Check that out and I am sure that by the time  you're watching this we are still using red light therapy. This is just kind of the... Even  though it's been around a long time, it's becoming more and more popular for people to  use this. Again I've had red light therapy in my home for years. Dr. Kuehne does as well.  Dr. Mangelson does now and but just only recently are we offering this to our patients.  Very excited about it. It's very affordable too. These small units as of this recording around  $500 is all. So this is something that's accessible for most of our patients.  [0:41:41]  PRP or PRF and Botox also could make sense in certain cases where maybe you are  treating the joint for the joint pain with PRF. Maybe this patient has some parafunction.  They're aware of some parafunction. Maybe they're going through something. Maybe it  would make sense to turn down that muscle for a little bit and Botox would be great for  that. So thinking of these things not as either or but how can they be used together in  some cases to be even more powerful than one therapy alone would be. Is there not just a  09/01/25   Page   of 13   15

SSC 2.0 - 321: PRF from TMD  cumulative effect of using these treatments but a multiplying type of effect when we use  these therapies that are individually effective but then together can be significantly more  effective. That goes also for PRP, PRF and physical therapy. Again not either or. Don't be  thinking of well I'm going to send this person to physical therapy. I'm going to do PRF on  this patient. Why not both? So the things that the physical therapists are going to do are  still valuable. It's not that with PRP and PRF we just don't need our physical therapists  anymore. Of course we do and even though we have been doing a ton of PRF we are still  using our physical therapists on a regular basis.  [0:43:02]  For me personally for the little aches and pains and whatnot that I've had in using PRF as  a matter of fact a relatively recent story is I was having some pain in this part of my arm. I  believe it's called a radial tunnel syndrome and you'll have some pain up in this area. And I  was going to go in and have Dr. Mangelson do a PRF injection into this area. And I did my  due diligence of going to Dr. YouTube, of course, and checked it out and decided what it  was, probably. And then I reached out to the physical therapist that we work with, who is  just absolutely amazing. She is fantastic. And I reached out to her and said, hey, I think  this might be what's going on. What do you think? And she's like, yeah, come on in. Let me  see how you're doing. So I go in. She works on me for about an hour, all just kind of man -  ual therapy. She did some dry needling areas, did needling up even into my neck. And at  the end of it, she's like, all right, go ahead and move your arm and do some things that  would have hurt an hour ago. And I did. And I'm like, yeah, that feels pretty good.  [ 0:44:14]  And I'm like, what do you think? And she goes, yeah, I think that's it. I think I got it. And fast  forward now, a month and a half, I think it's been since I saw her, maybe even a little  longer than that, pain free. So I didn't do the injection. Okay, so you get my point of telling  the story is I could have. Now, that would have been a little bit more of a hassle. I would  have had to go to the office and get blood drawn and do this. And I went to the physical  therapist instead of the PRP. Now, had it come back, I would have for sure done the PRF,  absolutely would have. And I still would have gone back to Julie to have her treat me. It's  not either or. It's sometimes both. It's sometimes one. And then maybe we look at the other  one. It's sometimes one. And then we add the other one. Don't think of these things as  just, again, it's the only thing. Think of these things as tools in your toolbox. Your big tool is  going to be PRF. That's going to be the one that you go for all the time. That's your go-to  instrument to help people. But all of these other things still absolutely valid.  Key Takeaways   [0:45:24]  So our key takeaways, combination therapies, absolutely indicated. And we will learn to -  gether what some of these best combination therapies include. Patient selection is impor -  tant. However, having said that, PRF does seem to be working on dang near everybody,  09/01/25   Page   of 14   15

SSC 2.0 - 321: PRF from TMD  dang near every time. So you are not in a case where it's like, gee, I picked the wrong pa -  tient for that. We just don't see that happening. Standardization needs, yes, but we also  just need to be the ones on the cutting edge of this and figuring out what helps our pa -  tients the most. Remember, our evidence-based medicine Venn diagram is your clinical  skill, what the patient wants, and what the literature says. And really in this field, the litera -  ture is less important than what your peers in Spencer Study Club are experiencing. So  keep in touch, post your cases to the Facebook group. Make sure that we are moving for -  ward together.  [0:46:25]  So that is that for that marathon session on regenerative TMD and regenerative medicine  techniques for TMJ disorders. I hope that you will go through this a few times. I am not an  expert in the biochemistry of regenerative medicine. I am not an expert in all of these dif -  ferent growth factors. I don't understand how it all works. And frankly, probably nobody  does. It is amazing to me that as of 2025 as I record this, how little we really know about  this body that we live in and how it heals itself. And that is the exciting thing to me is for my  career until recently, from 1998 when I started in my practice until just a couple years ago,  we didn't have what I just talked about with you. And we had splint therapy, and we did  have injection procedures and things like that.  [0:47:26]  But there were always a percentage of patients we weren't able to help. That percentage  of patients we aren't able to help is getting smaller and smaller and smaller due to this. If  you go back into the injections outside the deep dark hole section where I talked about  trigeminal neuralgia and gave those cases of members of our study club using PRF for  trigeminal neuralgia and those patients receiving relief that they'd not had for years, this is  just so, so, so exciting and you are in the right place at the right time because adding PRF  to splint therapy, having PRF as a standalone therapy is just flat out amazing.  [0:48:12]  And as you learn these skills and become more confident, I promise you, you're going to  get patients coming from far and wide to seek out care from you. You are going to help me  end open joint surgery. And once again, that is in no way intended to be a barb or offen -  sive towards our oral surgeon colleagues. Our oral surgeon colleagues have held and car -  ried a great burden for years and years and years as we dentists didn't know how to help  these patients and would ultimately dump them on our oral surgeons. No more. You  should be doing this. You should be comfortable in this. Learn how to do this. And I can  almost guarantee you that you will be able to help virtually every patient that comes to you  with a TMJ problem. Diagnosis is always the key. Got to get your accurate diagnosis. But if  you can get that accurate diagnosis and implement PRF and then get to the etiology of  what is causing their problem and address that, the odds of that patient needing open joint  surgery or, heaven forbid, joint replacement surgery are about zero. Okay. Take care.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 15   15

