SSC 2.0 - 220: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Studies 4 - 8  SSC 2.0   Level 2  220: Understanding Sleep Studies;  Case Studies 4 - 8  [intro music]  Case Study 4   [0:00:12]  Alright, let's move on now to case number 4. So these next few cases were given to me by  my friend Jeff Wyscarver, who is a registered polysomnographic technician, has been in  the field for like 30 years, has done thousands upon thousands upon thousands of sleep  studies, and actually was influential in developing some things like the NOX T3. The NOX  T3 is a home sleep testing unit. As a matter of fact, I've got one right here. This is the  brains of the NOX T3. You can see how small that is. And the NOX T3 is cool for us den -  tists because it has EMG leads on it. The reason I have that here is I'm actually doing a  study, if you will, on me and my wife and some other family members and others on how  much time are our teeth in contact. Because with the NOX T3 we can make some guesses  at least on that if we calibrate accordingly. So if I put the EMG leads on, what I'm going to  do is put the EMG leads on and then tap my teeth together, see what that looks like, swal -  low, chew some gum, do various things to set it and see what those EMG readings are.  And then I'm going to wear it for 24 hours and see how much time I spend with my teeth  together in 24 hours. And then do that with several other people. Nevertheless, Jeff  Wyscarver was involved with that. NOX T3 is a very popular home sleep test. As you saw,  it's very small and then it can record things that a lot of home sleep tests can't.  Airway EMG Report   [0:01:57]  So here we have a patient that he called this kind of the snoring patient. So the AHI, so  here's our total sleep time. So now we're on HST. If that wasn't crystal clear to you. So 7  hours and 46 minutes of what is calling total sleep time. But the NOX T3 is not measuring  brain waves. So we don't know actually about that. So here we have total recording time, 7  hours, 48 minutes. It's saying the sleep time was 7 hours, 46 minutes. And it's using like  movement and things like that as a surrogate because we're not getting this from EEG  data. All right. That's kind of the start time, stop time of the recording. Here's our sleep effi -  ciency. The overall AHI 8.5, the oxygen desaturation index 10.8. So we haven't seen that  on our PSG. So that's not something typically on a PSG, but a lot of HSTs will give you the  oxygen desaturation index.  09/01/25   Page   of 1   10

SSC 2.0 - 220: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Studies 4 - 8  [0:03:03]  Okay, let's look at the other things that by now you should be kind of looking for. So our  apneas plus hypopneas. We have, here's our totals, 8.5 AHS supine. It was 21.6 and non-  supine 3.7. So this person, are they more supine dependent? You bet they are. So this is  right off the bat. If you had this as a baseline, you'd be like, all right, I want to get this per -  son off their back. Let's break down the apneas with the obstructive and mixed essentials.  So on the apneas, we had a total of 1.7 per hour supine, way more in supine than non-  supine. Obstructive is 1.2 and central, we had a half of essentials. We don't have any of  the mixed, but we've got mostly obstructive and the obstructive are 3.4 supine, only 0.4 on  the back, or off the back that is. So 3.4 on the back. This person, we'd like to get them off  their back. There's the longest apnea, 24.6 seconds. Hypopneas, obstructive total hypop -  neas, 6.8 per hour. Then we have 17.8 per hour supine, non-supine, only 2.8 per hour. On  the hypopneas, oh, there's the count right there.  [0:04:34]  So the count line here, so the apneas plus hypopneas with 66, apneas of 13, hypopneas  53. So if we do the line in, out, in, out, in, out, flatline, the flatline part was how many? 13,  in, out, in, out, in, out, shallow breathing, hypopnea was how many? 53. So this person  has more hypopneas than apneas. If this person goes home and tells their bed partner,  hey, they said I stopped breathing 8.5 times per hour, the bed partner will say, no, you  don't because they stopped breathing 13 times during that entire basically 8 hours. So  they stopped breathing less than two times per hour. Does that make sense? I hope that's  making sense. I hope I can impress upon you to make sure you talk to the patient about  that. This will be the biggest point that you can make is them understanding, oh, I get it. I  don't actually completely stop breathing. That was, I misunderstood that. Okay, that's what  they're going to say. There's the longest hypopnea, 72 seconds. I like how this is displayed  on this too. This makes it really easy for you and the patient. And these longest things,  that's a long time.  [0:05:48]  Like have them try to hold their breath for 24.6 seconds. Most people would struggle to do  that. Have them shallow breathe for 72 seconds and that would be tough. Okay, then we  have some other information here and that's pretty much it. So we have a snore percent  here is like basically none. So 0.1. So very light on the snoring. That's not really the prob -  lem.  Case Study 5   [0:06:17]  All right, moving along to case five. All right, this is another NOX T3 study. We'll go ahead  and make this one bigger here at the beginning. So we had our analysis duration, 7 and a  half hours. That's when it started and stuff AHI. Is kind of off the thingy there. That's kind of  hard to see. 74.9 probably. ODI 74, snore percent 1.2. So another person that's not snor -  09/01/25   Page   of 2   10

SSC 2.0 - 220: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Studies 4 - 8  ing a ton. Our apneas plus hypopneas, we get 74.9 per hour. Yeah, that's what it said right  there then, 74.9. The count of 559 apneas plus hypopneas. Apneas 52 per hour, 388 ap -  neas throughout the whole night. Supine 62.2, non-supine 0. Okay, interesting. So we'll  learn more about the supine, non-supine as we go down a little bit here. But so far we're  thinking, hmm, this supine thing might be a big deal here because it looks like almost all  the events are supine versus non-supine.  [0:07:30]  Now what I haven't seen so far up here is, well, how much time were they non-supine? If  they didn't spend any time non-supine, then no wonder they're all supine. But let's find that  out here in just a minute. All right, down to our hypopneas. We have 22.9 per hour. We  have a total count of 171. So in this patient, are they more apneic or hypopneic? Apneic by  a lot. Okay, again, relatively weird. That's checking the weird column when you're going to  have a patient that is far more apneas than they are hypopneas. This is a person where  you say, “hey, you stop breathing 74 times an hour,” their bed partner is probably going to  say, “oh yeah, yeah, you do”. Now they don't, but they, so with just the apneas, it's 62.2  times per hour on their back. So that bed partner is not going to quibble between one time  a minute and a little bit more than one time a minute. Okay, so this is a case where they're  going to be, they probably believed it when the doctor said, you stop breathing over 70  times an hour. Their bed partner is probably like, “yeah, yeah, you really do.”  [0:08:41]  Okay, so we see the patient has lots of apneas, way worse supine than non-supine. The  thing that this summary sheet doesn't give me is the time supine and non-supine. That's  something I would want, and in the more detailed report, I guarantee that this is in here  because it can't do this math without knowing those things. But in the summary sheet,  that's not listed. I'd like that, I'd like that in the summary sheet. So this now, this same pa -  tient is given an oral appliance and the snore index goes down, the ODI and the AHI go  down significantly. Let's kind of look here. So the apneas plus hypopneas goes down to  49. Supine is still the problem, right? So 19 per hour versus only 2.5 per hour non-supine.  The obstructive apneas, 3.2, 11 supine, 1.49 supine, count 28. Let's check out our hypop -  neas. So our hypopneas, our total count is 19. The apneas is 30. So this patient still has  more apneas than hypopneas. But, you know, my goodness, if we can do the overall ap -  neas plus hypopneas up here, we want this person on their side. If they can be on their  side, they don't have sleep apnea. Okay, we want to get this person on their side with their  oral appliance, sleeping however they want. They still technically have mild sleep apnea.  But with this report here, what you would want to be doing is, hey, what can we do to get  you off your back? That is the take-home message here.  Case Study 6   [0:10:26]  09/01/25   Page   of 3   10

SSC 2.0 - 220: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Studies 4 - 8  Case 6. Another NOX T3. You should be used to seeing these by now. Let's kind of blow  this one up. He called this one Bonnie Bruxism. So here's our AHI 18.4. We've got our  snore percent down here, apnea plus hypopneas, 18.4 supine, 23.7 non-supine, 9.4. You  seeing a theme? Seeing that people are way worse on their back? Yeah. 139 is the total  count for all of them. Apneas, 1.9 per hour total, 2.1 on the back, 1.4 non-supine, only 14  apneas. Let's see, that seems like we're going to have a lot of hypopneas. Hey, sure  enough, we sure do. So we got 125 hypopneas, only 14 apneas. This is a person that was  told, you stop breathing 18.4 times per hour, and their bed partner said, “no, you do not”  Because as far as their bed partner is concerned, they stop breathing twice an hour.  [ 0:11:26]  So I've covered this more than once, but it is so important that you go over this with your  patient so that they understand this. So just kind of to repeat, beat this in, that's really the  take-home message here. And once again, our supine versus non-supine is significantly  better, 23.7 on their back, only 9.4 on their side. So if we can get them on their side,  they're going to do better. Now, some back-of-the-napkin math here, I can tell you that the  patient spent a significant amount of time on their back because non-supine, we have 9.4,  supine, we have 23.7, our overall, our total is 18.4, which skews close to that 23.7, right?  So here's yet another case of can we get them off of their back to make a tremendous dif -  ference with their AHI?  Case Study 7   [0:12:25]  All right, let's move on now to case 7. So here we have representations of a different look  for a home sleep test. And this could be a different case. So let's see if you can get out  your magnifying glass, your detective hat here, and see if you can figure out what's going  on. So we have this first one is from 2021. Here's the patient's date of birth, 61 years old at  the time, 185 pounds, 5'5", and this is the baseline home sleep test. Total number of ap -  neas, 55, hypopneas, 139. So this is a more hypopneic than apneic. Total apnea index,  9.4, hypopnea index, 23.8. So our AHI overall is 15.8. We have some other numbers here,  RDI, remember that's with RIRAs, respiratory effort index, 15.3. Here's our oximetry data.  So a bunch of different information there to read kind of the analysis summary there. A to -  tal of 55 apneas, 7 of which were central based on respiratory effort, and 139 hypopneas  were identified. Total number of obstructive events was 187. Apnea index, 9.4, central ap -  nea index, 1.2. During the recording period, there was a total of 56 desaturations. Baseline  oxygen level was 97, lowest oxygen level was 84. Time spent below an oxygen of 88 was  less than half a minute. RDI was 33 per hour. During periods of the recording no less than  10 minutes, the maximum density of the RDI was elevated up to 98.5, while the AHI was  15.8 per hour. This index includes hypopneas, exhibit oxygen desaturation of 4% or  greater, and all apneas.  [0:14:20]  09/01/25   Page   of 4   10

SSC 2.0 - 220: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Studies 4 - 8  That 4% or greater thing on there is like a Medicare dog whistle, so to speak. So that's  saying this is using Medicare guidelines. All right, so we have our overall AHI of 15.8 in  2021 when the patient was 61 years old. All right, so now we have the patient get another  home sleep test, same equipment, same company running that, but now time has passed.  So this is in 2025. The patient is now 65 years old, and our AHI at 4% is 20.7. So the per -  son's apnea hypopnea index has gotten worse as she's gotten older. The likely reason that  this person had a new sleep test is because she's 65 and is probably now on Medicare,  and Medicare requires the sleep study to be less than a year old for payment. But what do  you see on this that may account for that AHI being higher? I'll let you just kind of look at  that for a second. You can get a gold star if you get this. Okay, and let me make it actually  maybe a little easier on you. This will be small, so that's it kind of blown up, but let me put  it on one page here.  [0:15:55]  So hopefully you got a big enough screen that you're looking at this on. If you're doing this  on your phone, you know, forget about it. But if you've got this on the screen, here it is side  by side. What is likely the reason for the worsening of the sleep apnea from AHI of 15.8 to  20.7? Okay, get ready to get your gold star here. Did you pick up that it was weight gain?  Okay, so not only is this person four years older, but they have gained, let's see, that is 35  pounds in that period of time. BMI went from 30.8 up to 36.6. Neck circumference from  34.3 centimeters to 39.4 centimeters. Do you think that could have an effect on their sleep  apnea? You better believe it. So this is the reason I throw this case study in is this could be  missed. You could have treated this patient with oral appliance therapy and gone off the  old study. The patient's like, hey, I got a study. Had that study. I don't need to do another  study. And you're like, yeah, you probably don't. And you would be treating worse sleep  apnea than you thought.  [0:17:16]  Now, this isn't a crazy example. This could have been way worse. So with a 35-pound  weight gain, I would expect a much higher AHI, and we didn't see that. And so that's some -  thing to learn from, too. But nevertheless, if we wouldn't have gotten this new sleep study,  we wouldn't have known really what we were dealing with. We would have been off of that  older number in a patient that has gained weight, that has gained age, that has gained  neck circumference, that all of these things that are going into this, and we would have  been potentially setting up ourselves for a less likely of a win because we didn't know what  we were treating. So keep that in mind. Am I saying you always got to have a brand new,  fresh sleep study to treat people? No. But when in doubt, and particularly for your  Medicare-age patients, it doesn't cost them anything. Medicare will pay for a new sleep  study as long as it's medically necessary.  [0:18:18]  By the way, too, little pearl is most medical doctors, we find, sleep doctors, don't know that  Medicare requires a new sleep study every year in order to pay for the treatment. Now,  what I mean, I don't mean that the patient has to go in every year and get a new sleep  study to have their CPAP continue to be covered or their oral appliance covered. The way  09/01/25   Page   of 5   10

SSC 2.0 - 220: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Studies 4 - 8  it works is if the patient stops treatment, so let's say you have CPAP for a couple years,  but then they stop, and now they want to try an oral appliance, they have to have a new  sleep study. That sleep study has to be within a year old. We have had to teach our sleep  doctors that because they didn't know that. And sometimes their staff can get a little bit up -  set about why the patient's complaining to us that they have to have another sleep study.  We don't want them to do another sleep study. Why is the dentist, "making them get a  new sleep study"? We're like, we aren't. It's the insurance rules that are making them do  that. And we had to educate them on that. So sometimes, believe it or not, you have to  educate your medical colleagues on some of these rules. Take-home message on this  one, again, is know what you're treating.  Case Study 8   [0:19:25]  Okay, Case 8. Can you believe we're doing so many cases? This is your last one. Okay,  last case. And then from there on out, you'll just have your own cases, and you can post  them to the Facebook group and stuff like that for education on that. Make sure you use  those forms, right? Make sure you use those forms like I showed on the earlier cases that  can make this stuff go really well. But here we go. We're going to go back to another PSG.  Sorry that the scan is so crappy on this. Our scanner is terrible. So we have our PSG kind  of going through. Here's some of the sleep stages stuff here. Time of study, the patient  was awake 26 minutes. Percentage of total sleep time, she was in stage N1 for 9%. Is that  high or low? That's slightly high. Stage N2 for 74%. High or low? That is definitely high. N3  for 0%. Clearly that's low. REM for 16.7%. That's not awesome either. Let's get down here  to the ventilation study. She was studied in the supine position for 67.2% of the total sleep  time. Prone on her tummy for none. Right side 25% I think that says.  [0:20:43]  And on the left side 7%. Snoring was 3 on a 0 to 10 scale. So isn't that kind of interesting  that you just have all these different things and they'll present them in different ways. So  this one they like to give snoring on a 0 to 10 scale. She's noted to have 3 obstructive ap -  nea events. 0 centrals. 10 mixed apneas. Mean duration of apnea events was 12 seconds.  That's pretty short, right? There were also 31 hypopneic events. Mean duration 24 sec -  onds. This resulted in a total apnea apnea index of 5.1 events per hour. Supine AHI of 7.1.  REM AHI of 23. So with that and they gave you the REM numbers and stuff up here. What  can you conclude? Well you can conclude that this person basically has supine REM sleep  apnea. Because the overall AHI is right there at almost normal. Normal as far as what the  sleep doctors say. And the REM is very high, 23.1 AHI. And we just saw that she was also  on her back almost 70% of the time. So we can kind of do some figure in there that if we  could get her on her side that would be better and then that would bring her below that 5  threshold.  [0:22:00]  09/01/25   Page   of 6   10

SSC 2.0 - 220: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Studies 4 - 8  Room air oxygen saturations onset was 93. Mean sat 95 which is good. Did get down to  81 but spent about 1.2 minutes below 88 so that was pretty short. Sometimes when you  see these nadirs that are that low and you're like that is bizarre. Sometimes it is artifact.  Sometimes not. This is a PSG though. So usually that data is pretty good since they've got  someone. It's an attended study. They're watching them all night long, right? Okay. Leg  movements. Four leg movements. Periodic limb movements. Low PLM index. Cardiac  summary. There's their billing and diagnostic codes and what it is. Okay. Here's our his -  togram. Here's our stages up here. Body position throughout the night. Micro arousals.  Apnea and hypopneas. You kind of see those clustered there. Flow and oxygen saturation.  Okay. So this same person then goes back to get an oral appliance.  Oral Appliance Titration Study   [0:23:00]  So this is oral appliance titration study that was done in 2025. So we do these. And we're  extremely blessed in the Boise area that we have been able to continue to do these in-lab  full PSG oral appliance titrations. There are very few people in the country, in the world for  that matter, that do this. We're very blessed to work with the sleep doctors that we do  there. They are the best in the world as far as I'm concerned. All right. So this is our oral  appliance titration. There's the quality. Optimal EMA oral appliance setting was found to be  at the 17 blue band. Residual AHI, the setting was 1.2. That's pretty good. Supine REM  sleep was observed on this setting. She had a relatively low residual AHI on all settings of  the oral appliance, although little to no supine REM sleep was captured on the number 19  blue or the 15 blue bands. Thus, choice of bands will depend in large part on patient com -  fort and how well her symptoms are controlled. Very nice. Nadir of 85% up from 81. Aver -  age 93. Spent 3 minutes below 89. Says saturations remained greater than 85 on the 17  blue bands. So that's good. PLMs, no evidence of that. Cardiac rhythm. Sleep architecture  was good overall. Sleep efficiency 94. Here we have, says she did take a sleep aid, by the  way. Sleep stages attained. N1 was 5.1. How's that? Normal. N2, 78. Still high. N3, 3.5.  Still low. REM, 12.6. Still low. Browser index 7.3. Oral appliances were well tolerated.  Conclusion   [0:24:53]  So conclusions. Oral appliance treatment with EMA device using the number 17 bands is  recommended, although the final decision on choice of bands will come from Dr. Kuehne.  Oral appliance used. So that's interesting too, right? They're telling you this is our impres -  sion. This is the data. Dr. Kuehne's still the doctor. So the number 17 blue bands seem to  do the best here. This sleep doctor did comment that the patient did well with all the  bands. Just this one happened to be where they got some supine REM. So they know for  sure that that's working pretty good. But overall, send them back to Dr. Kuehne to make  09/01/25   Page   of 7   10

SSC 2.0 - 220: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Studies 4 - 8  the final determination. So that is another good case. You may wonder in that case, like,  my gosh, relatively mild sleep apnea, why are they even treated? Well, because the mild -  ness, mild-moderate-severeness of your AHI is not directly correlated with your symptoma -  tology. So this patient was symptomatic. She needed to be treated. She was treated, and  she did well.  Representation   [0:25:53]  This is a cool representation of the different things that happen with the different band set -  tings. So again, our lab does this because they titrate oral appliances all the time. So kind  of cool. So we have our number and the band setting. If it was a different appliance, it  would say so many turns of the screw or different positions, depending on what appliances  we're using. We have written protocols for every appliance that we use, and they're lami -  nated. They're there in the sleep labs. Dr. Kuehne's cell phone number is included in that  so that they can call up Dr. Kuehne if there's a question in the middle of the night. That su -  per rarely happens. And to put this in perspective, so we average over 100 fittings a month  for sleep, and the majority of those will return for titration studies. So titration studies for  oral appliance therapy are done pretty much every night in the greater Boise area. It'd be  strange for there not to be one or two or more, not just EMA, but oral appliance titrations  done in the Boise area. So all the labs that we work with there, we have multiple labs, and  they've all been trained on this for literally decades. Okay? Now, you may never do this.  [0:27:13]  You may never in your career do a live titration in a sleep lab, but I hope you can. I hope  you talk to your doctors and make a case for why this is best because this is best. But you  see here they go through all of the stuff. We've got the total sleep time, how many minutes  they are in each of those positions. We've got the supine data. We've got the sleep stages  and the respiratory events all broken down by what they were in each band. You see that  overall the patient did really, really well in every position, and you can just kind of use that  to break it down. So that's pretty cool. Good breakdown on that patient. Here's the sleep  histogram again with the oral appliance therapy and just kind of going through. This is the  value of having those PSGs and is all that data that you and your sleep doctor can use to  really help people out.  That’s it!   [0:28:16]  Okay, that's it. That's a lot, right? That's a lot on understanding sleep studies and a lot of  case studies there. And this is, you know, I've not represented every single case that  you're ever going to come across. That's what the Facebook group is for. That's what our  other tools are for in Spencer Study Club. That's what, you know, working with your sleep  09/01/25   Page   of 8   10

SSC 2.0 - 220: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Studies 4 - 8  doctors are for. But I hope, and especially for you beginners, that you'll use those forms in  the document center, that you'll go through those first 10, 20, 30, 40 cases. When a case  comes up that you're like, man, that just doesn't make any sense. The person is telling me  they feel better, that their bed partner says their snoring's gone, but their AHI just didn't  drop that much. That's when you get out those tools, look at it, and then this is the best  opportunity for you to build a relationship of trust and collegial value with your sleep doc -  tors and primary care doctors. Because you can then contact them and say, hey, doc,  common patient, or this patient you saw that I saw, AHI went from 12 only to 8. That  seemed a little disappointing. I've kind of dug into the details here, and it appears that this  person had a ton more supine sleep and REM sleep on the oral appliance titration than  they did on the original baseline study.  [0:29:44]  Could that account for maybe the AHI not dropping as much as maybe we would have  thought it did? Ask some intelligent questions. Don't tell them. Don't call them up and be  like, hey, obviously, because you said that they should try CPAP again, and obviously  you're wrong because the reason that the AHI is still elevated is because they were on  their back all night long, which is probably because you told them to sleep on their back all  night long. Patient tells me they never sleep on their back. What's your problem, doc?  That's not the approach. The approach is, hey, I was thinking about this. I was looking at  this. Nobody does that. No one else does that. Primary care doctors don't do that. The  primary care doctor is not looking through the details and looking for stuff like that. They're  not even coming up with, hey, your problem's all on your back. Let's get you off your back.  And think about that, too. With all of these cases I went through, now put that over. Over -  lay that on what you think about sleep apnea in general. Think about these ideas of we're  going to expand our way out of sleep apnea.  [0:30:51]  Okay? Does that make a lot of sense to you still? Why is supine, why does that come up  so much? Is it because their maxilla's not wide enough? Now, again, don't get me wrong.  I'm not saying there aren't indications and cases for this, but just let the data soak in your  brain a little bit here and see what really is accounting for these apneas and hypopneas  and desaturations and then overall how they feel. And that's where you're going to take the  objective information of these sleep studies that you now understand and that you will bet -  ter understand the more you go, and the subjective report of the patient. And we want both  to look good, right? We don't just want AHI's of 0 and the patient still feels like crap. And  we don't want the patient feeling awesome and the sleep doctor thinks you didn't do any -  thing at all because the AHI didn't come down. We really want both of these things and  over time, I promise you, there's going to be a shift away from AHI. It is. We're going to be  looking at more oxygen desaturations and they're going to be looking at more of the things  that are really affecting the physiology.  [0:32:01]  But for right now, this is the world we're living in and this is what we're dealing with and so  it's important for you and for me to understand these sleep studies so we can talk to our  09/01/25   Page   of 9   10

SSC 2.0 - 220: Understanding Sleep Studies; Case Studies 4 - 8  colleagues, work with our colleagues, talk to our patients. Please, please, please show  every one of your patients how many apneas they're having, how many hypopneas they're  having. Explain that to them. Help them understand that, no, you really aren't stopping  breathing this many times per hour. It's actually this many times per hour you're stopping  breathing and then you're doing some shallow breathing. That will be worth its weight in  gold. The patient will understand what's going on. They will be more engaged. They will  have more buy-in on their own problem as you help them understand it. And, by the way,  they'll be more interested in getting a follow-up study. If they think the original study and  any study that they've had was a total bunch of malarkey and not valid at all and they nev -  er understood it in the first place, why would they, why would they, why would you want to  spend any more money on an additional study?  [0:33:03]  On the other hand, if they see it's like, oh, okay, that was really valuable. I understand it  now. I get it. That's cool. I want to get that information. That's the way our patients tend to  look at this. We tell them, hey, after we've treated you with your appliance and you're snor -  ing less and feeling better, we're going to get you back to the sleep doc and you and the  sleep doc are going to talk about getting a follow-up sleep study because that's the only  way we're going to know how you're doing. And they'll be like, yeah, okay, I get it. That's  right. That makes sense. Okay, that's it. That's all I got for you. I hope that you understand  sleep studies better now than you did before and that you will use these tools to under -  stand them better and better and better as time comes and take advantage of your under -  standing. All right, take care.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 10   10

