SSC 2.0 - 320: History and Evolution of PRP, PRGF & PRF  SSC 2.0   Level 3  320: History and Evolution of PRP, PRGF  & PRF  [intro music]  Evolution of PRP: From 1st to 2nd Generation  First-Generation Platelet-Rich Plasma (PRP)   [0:00:12]  So now let's talk a little bit about this evolution from that first original PRP into the different  generations of it. As mentioned earlier, PRP developed out of improved centrifugation  techniques and in just a goal of improving PRP and using it in these different applications  rather than just the original blood transfusions. With PRP, as mentioned before, there's  typically a two-spin cycle. So the first spin is called the soft spin. This involves low cen -  trifugal force and separates the red blood cells from the plasma and a buffy coat. Then  there's a second spin. This is higher centrifugal force and it further concentrates the  platelets by separating the platelet-rich plasma from the platelet-poor plasma. So that is a  hallmark of the PRP technique is these double spin technique.  Second-Generation: Platelet-Rich Fibrin (PRF)   [0:01:12]  Then we have PRF or a second generation formulation of platelet-rich plasma. So devel -  oped in the early 2000s, this has emerged as a more natural alternative to PRP, if you will,  because not using the anticoagulants. It involves a single slower centrifugation process  that allows for the formation of a fibrin matrix rich in platelets and leukocytes. This matrix  facilitates a sustained release of growth factors and enhances tissue regeneration and on  the slower centrifugation process, that is in contrast to the high force used in PRP. So  when the word slow here is used, think more the spin of how fast the spin is. The time in -  volved is much faster actually, but the centrifugal force is less. The speed of the centrifuge  is slower.  Advances in Centrifugation Techniques   [0:02:07]  There are different types of centrifugation as well. So fixed angle centrifugation is the typi -  cal centrifugation technique that is used. And then there's a relatively new technique called  09/01/25   Page   of 1   19

SSC 2.0 - 320: History and Evolution of PRP, PRGF & PRF  horizontal centrifugation. And you'll notice I mentioned the name before Myron, and Rick  Myron's name is right here on this study. He's one of the most, if not the most published  authors in the field of PRF and regenerative medicine techniques for dentistry in general.  And the idea here is to kind of use my hand here. The fixed angle centrifuge, the test tube  is going to be at about this angle. The horizontal spin, it starts off and then as that centrifu -  gation occurs, it comes out horizontally. The theory behind that is that the horizontal nature  of the test tube is going to allow the heavy and the lighter cells to pass each other better,  which actually makes sense.  [0:03:10]  If you're at an angle like   this, those cells are kind of in the way of each other and having to  go around each other. Whereas if you make it a little easier, then they can pass each other  and that does make sense. The looking at the concentrations of the cells that we're looking  for in the results, it does appear that horizontal spin does result in a higher concentration  of the platelets and leukocytes in the PRF. Now, the question is, is that needed? And we  don't know. Again, Dr. Myron believes strongly that it is. However, the cases I'll show you  here in a moment and that you may have seen in the other levels already, all were done  were fixed angle. So we were doing this before even learning about horizontal spin tech -  nique. And now in our office, we've done both and we've not seen a difference. So we are  using them interchangeably. If we were to have our horizontal spin centrifuge go down or  whatever, we wouldn't hesitate for one second about using the fixed angle. We've not seen  a big difference with the horizontal and this goes not just in my offices specifically, but  across Spencer Study Club members in general.  [0:04:36]  We all are sharing our data on this and again, none of us have really seen that big of a dif -  ference. The cost is not that much more for horizontal spin. So if you like that idea, and it's  certainly not going to hurt. I don't believe there's anyone out there who believes that hori -  zontal spin is worse than fixed angle. I'm not positive about that, but I don't believe that is  the case. So you could just get the horizontal spin if you're getting your first centrifuge, you  could just get the horizontal spin and you'd be fine.  [0:05:06]  You wouldn't have to worry about that. However, if you get the fixed angle or you get the  fixed angle now and then you go to some conference and particularly you hear somebody  who possibly sells a horizontal spin centrifuge and they're talking about how theirs is so  much more superior, take that with a bit of a grain of salt. The analogy I used there, and  this may be an inaccurate analogy, most analogies fall down in some way or another, but  it's kind of like a drug with how many receptors there are for a certain medication, let's say,  or as well as a dose-response curve, right?  [0:05:50]  But thinking of just kind of the receptors principle there, if we have a thousand receptors  and we then put in 10,000 cells to attach to those receptors or components to attach to  those receptors, is that really necessary? If we have a thousand receptors and a thousand  particles that are going to interact with those receptors, that would seemingly take care of  09/01/25   Page   of 2   19

SSC 2.0 - 320: History and Evolution of PRP, PRGF & PRF  all the receptors. So to have 5,000 or to have 10,000 or to have 100,000 wouldn't really  matter because there's only so many receptors, okay? And I think that could be the case  here that, if you think about if you have an injury or something like that too, your body is  going to send the amount of these platelets and leukocytes and all of the growth factors to  the area that are necessary. It's not going to send everyone in your entire body to it just  because like, oh shoot, there's a cut. We better send, harness all of the power of our entire  body to this area. Now that makes no sense. So the body's going to do that itself. It's going  to send an appropriate amount of these cells to that healing site.  [0:07:09]  It’s not going to send every one of them. So I'm not convinced that a higher concentration  is necessary. Having said that, I'll give a counter argument to what I just said. If you have  somebody who is less healthy themselves, who maybe their blood isn't as high of quality,  let's say. So let's say the patient is in their 70s. Well, the quality of the contents of their  blood is not going to be as high as, a teenager. Okay, that's intuitively obvious, yes? So  maybe in the 70-year-old to have a technique that concentrates what they have is more  important than if we have a younger, healthier person who's going to have more than ade -  quate material. Does that make sense? So again, I don't think you're going to go wrong  with the horizontal spin centrifuge. On the other hand, if you have a fixed angle right now,  don't worry about it. I don't think you need to throw that one in the trash and get yourself a  horizontal spin. But you could get a horizontal spin down the road. So don't kind of buy all  the marketing hype on this stuff.  [0:08:19]  For reasons that I'm not completely privy to, so I mentioned Dr. Myron, who's on this pa -  per, Dr. Shokran, and they wrote a book together, and then they had a massive falling out.  They hate each other. I don't know all the backstory and all the drama on that. I've talked  to both of them. Dr. Shokran will tell you that the horizontal spin centrifuge is total baloney.  Dr. Myron will tell you that it's got to be a horizontal spin. Bottom line, we're getting awe -  some results using fixed angle and didn't see improved results with horizontal spin, but I  don't believe that nor did we see lesser results with horizontal spin. So I think you can do it  with either. It's more the doing it is more important than what centrifuge you use.  Classification Systems: Standardizing PRP & PRF   [0:09:12]  Now let's talk about some of the different variations on the theme that we have here. And  there's something called the Ehrenfest classification of 2009. And this kind of breaks some  of these down. And this can get a little confusing because you'll hear of different types of  PRF. But let's go through these really quick. So we have our pure platelet-rich plasma,  PPRP. This is leukocyte poor, low-density fibrin network. These fibrin networks kind of  think of that as a lattice. And all of these cells can get kind of caught in that lattice, that ma -  trix, and then that matrix can be there. I'll talk about this more in a second. But in general,  09/01/25   Page   of 3   19

SSC 2.0 - 320: History and Evolution of PRP, PRGF & PRF  the less of a fibrin matrix you have there, the less long-acting the treatment will be. Now  don't necessarily take that as a super negative, but to use an analogy here, PRP is the  hare in the tortoise and the hare story. And it's going fast. So PRP will tend to have a very  quick reaction. Patients will feel better basically immediately. And then it tails off pretty  quick. Whereas PRF is more the tortoise and patients will still have a good reaction, but  this reaction will improve over time and will be more long-lasting. So that's the big thing  there. And think of that with that fibrin matrix of holding those cells in the area longer. So  our leukocyte and platelet-rich plasma LPRP is leukocyte-rich. Leukocytes, of course,  white blood cells that are going to help out with this antibacterial component. Still low-den -  sity fibrin network in the LPRP.  [0:10:59]  Then we get into our PRF, pure platelet-rich fibrin, leukocyte-poor, high-density fibrin net -  work. And then our leukocyte platelet-rich fibrin, or LPRF, of course, is leukocyte-rich, still  has our high-density fibrin network. I'm not going to go into details on all of these other  classification systems, but just leave it at there are other classification systems. So you  can just be kind of aware of this. And this becomes important when you are reading the  literature and looking at what was done? How was it done? Things like that. Once you  learn the technique for PRF from us, if you haven't yet, you will have kind of your recipe.  But even as we go over literature references here in a moment for the clinical references,  you'll notice that there's a wide variety of how things are done. So these classification sys -  tems can help you to understand better what's being done and why maybe one study  would show more improvement in one case and not in another case. And they're using the  same PRP term or PRF term, but actually how they put them together is different. So it's  not always the same. So there's the Mishra classification. There's the PAW classification.  [0:12:15]  These are more associated with PRP. Why they are looking at these classification systems  is to just standardize it. It is harder if we have all sorts of different ways that these are be -  ing prepared and being used. And then that makes it more challenging for you as a clini -  cian to figure out, does this work? Does it not work? Again, we know it works from our ex -  perience, but this is something we're now developing as well for TMJ uses is everyone in  Spencer Study Club is pretty much doing the exact same technique. And because of that,  we now have thousands and thousands of patients that are being treated and that's allow -  ing us to help people in a better way. So I understand that the need for standardization of  these protocols so that we can all be on the same page.  Platelet Biology & Growth Factor Release   [0:13:03]  So let's back up a little bit and look at platelet biology. So platelets or thrombocytes are  small, anucleate cell fragments derived from megakaryocytes in the bone marrow. They  play a pivotal role in hemostasis and wound healing. Within platelets, alpha granules are  09/01/25   Page   of 4   19

SSC 2.0 - 320: History and Evolution of PRP, PRGF & PRF  the most abundant secretory organelles comprising 50 to 80% of the granules. So those  are our platelets that we're talking about.  [0:13:29]  We discussed this before, but to kind of go over this again, we have our PDGF, which  stimulates cell proliferation and angiogenesis. TGF-beta regulates inflammation and pro -  motes extracellular matrix production. VEGF enhances blood vessel formation. Epidermal  growth factor promotes epithelial cell growth and differentiation. Insulin-like growth factor  1, IGF-1, facilitates cell growth and survival. Fibroblast growth factor supports tissue repair  and angiogenesis. And hepatocyte growth factor aids in tissue regeneration and cell motili -  ty. All of these growth factors are found in our PRP or PRF formulations.  Mechanism of Growth Factor Release   [0:14:09]  Speaking particularly for PRP, there is a rapid initial release. Approximately 70% of the  growth factors are released within the first 10 minutes. Then we have our sustained re -  lease, but this is just over the next hour or so. So once again, PRP is the hair and it is off  to the races. It is heading out quick. With this quick response, we have cellular chemo -  taxis. So we have signaling cells that are calling on all of the healing factors to come to the  aid of that area. We have cell proliferation and differentiation, angiogenesis, and extracel -  lular matrix formation.  Advancements in PRP Delivery Methods   [0:14:49]  Now let's talk about delivery of platelet-rich plasma and our other techniques that we're  talking about here.There is, first of course, the direct injection method, and that is going to  be used for almost all musculoskeletal problems where they're going to inject directly to  the spot that is needed. The main issue with this is the skill of the practitioner. This is  where you want someone who knows what they're doing.  [0:15:17]  The Dr. Tallick that I mentioned before, I've been with him in his office when he is doing  these procedures, and he has a C-arm, so he's able to do fluoroscopy, live x-ray, and by  comparing the MRI to then that live x-ray, and he's able to use radio-opaque pointers, so  he puts a little metal rod on the patient's back, let's say, if he's going to do a spine injec -  tion, and he's using that x-ray to pinpoint exactly where he's going to be as soon as he's  got the anatomical landmarks observed there, and through the radiograph, he then will in -  ject, and then the last thing he'll do before he injects is shoot one more x-ray, see that his  needle is exactly where he thinks it should be, and then he'll give that injection. On the  other hand, to give a complete contrast to that, I went to a company here in Utah that  does, and this company is a franchise, it's all over the United States, and they were going  09/01/25   Page   of 5   19

SSC 2.0 - 320: History and Evolution of PRP, PRGF & PRF  to do injections for my back pain that I was having at the time, and they would have done it  right then in the office, no imaging at all.  [0:16:26]  As a matter of fact, when I brought up, well, shouldn't we get an MRI so we know what the  actual injury is, the person who saw me said, well, that really wouldn't change how I treat  you. Okay, I understand now, knowing more about this, why she said that, and that is be -  cause even if it was a disc issue or if it was a facet issue in my back, as long as her needle  was in the basically the general area, probably I was going to be better because things  would... The healing factors would come into that area. Okay, that's how it works. On the  other hand, another regenerative medicine doctor I talk to all the time is fond of saying that  there's, you know, close is only in horseshoes and hand grenades and steroids. He'll say.  It's like with regenerative medicine, precision is important. So you want to work with some -  body that knows what they're doing, and by the way, that means if you have a patient or  you yourself have had something done and it just didn't seem to be as effective as you  would have hoped, it's possible that it was the practitioner and not the product of what they  were injecting.  [0:17:38]  You have to have the appropriate material, that appropriate PRP or PRF formulation, but  then you also need to have the skill to get it where it needs to be. We also have mi -  croneedling assisted delivery, and this is used more in aesthetics, could also be used for  hair regrowth, things like that. And this is using a microneedling device, putting the PRP or  PRF on the superficial, on the skin, and then microneedling it into the depth of that mi -  croneedling procedure. This became popular with something called the vampire facial, and  this is being used in aesthetics readily and again with hair loss and things like that. Some -  times using both injections and microneedling and sometimes just the microneedling. And  then lastly, this is even being used in creams and sprays. And this is kind of exciting be -  cause we're looking at this not just with PRP and PRF, which would be autologous, getting  it from the patient themselves, but also with exosomes and having exosomes that can be  used in creams for TMJ problems and things like that. So this is a really exciting field of  how many different ways can we use these growth factors.  [0:18:58]  And then lastly, even going to nanoparticle-based systems, 3D printed scaffolds are now  being used, and then ultrasound guided injections to help with the precision. We'll talk  about that more with regard to TMJ problems, and that's something we're looking at doing  and our teaching is ultrasound guided injections to make sure you're actually where you  think you are.  Common Applications of PRP & PRF   [0:19:19]  09/01/25   Page   of 6   19

SSC 2.0 - 320: History and Evolution of PRP, PRGF & PRF  Within orthopedic medicine, common applications of PRP and PRF include knee os -  teoarthritis. PRP has been demonstrated to provide superior pain relief and functional im -  provement compared to corticosteroids as well as hyaluronic acid. PRF is just emerging  science in that, as I've mentioned multiple times now, the orthopedic surgery world does  not seem to be using PRF as much as we are in the world of dentistry. So the vast majority  of the studies are on PRP. This study referenced here at the bottom in 2021 is looking at  PRP versus intraarticular injection of corticosteroids. Overall, steroids still, as of 2025, as  I'm recording this, definitely used every day in orthopedic surgery and musculoskeletal  treatment centers. They're going to use steroids all the time. PRP is less commonly done,  PRF very uncommon to be done.  [0:20:26]  Next, we have tendinopathy such as tennis elbow, Achilles tendon injuries. PRP has been  shown to provide significant improvement in pain and dysfunction and usually outperforms  the other conventional treatments including steroids and just physical therapy. PRF, less  studied. However, this fibrin matrix may improve the healing of the tendon and that's why  they are continuing to research that. With rotator cuff tears, PRP has been shown to be  helpful as an adjunct to the surgery. This is one of the reasons I brought this up when Jen -  ny had her surgery. PRF, limited data once again, but does seem to make sense to use it  in that application as well. Muscle injuries and post-surgical repair, PRP has been well  studied and shows to be very effective. PRF, less studied just like all of the rest of these.  Please note the dates on all of these studies at the bottom, and please remember, I know  I've mentioned this before, but remember that all of these articles are in your literature li -  brary so you can pull up these individually because probably this section may be of partic -  ular interest to you as you may be suffering with some of these things yourself.  Clinical Outcomes & Levels of Evidence   [0:21:44]  In this systematic review done in 2023, the authors looked at the use of PRP versus  steroids, hyaluronic acid and found that PRP was successful in providing pain relief and  functional improvement. The safety profile of PRP and PRF is excellent and the evidence  level is not as strong as corticosteroids because of relatively new phenomenon, but the big  part there is that there's variability in how it's prepared, how it's done, things like that. So  again, as there is more homogeneality of how these things are prepared and of protocols  amongst all these different fields, I think that the level of evidence will be stronger and it'll  be something that literally insurance companies and others just can't ignore. Even with the  heterogeneity of the nature of that, of different people doing things different ways, the out -  comes are always positive and that's what we're seeing with TMJ problems too.  Comparison   [0:22:56]  09/01/25   Page   of 7   19

SSC 2.0 - 320: History and Evolution of PRP, PRGF & PRF  In this same systematic review, they mentioned that corticosteroids, the pro of it, is it pro -  vides rapid pain relief. And in the short term, it makes a big difference for the patient. And  this is really the take home message here is the con is that the effects diminish over time.  And as you see bolded here, repeated use may have deleterious effects on joint tissues.  This has been well known for a long time. And maybe you have had a steroid injection be -  fore and you just had one and that was it.  [0:23:29]  I remember Jenny having an injury to her foot once and I did, off the record here. I'm a  dentist. This is slightly outside of the area where I normally treat people. But I did a few  drops of steroid in her foot in the area that was hurting and the pain went away almost im -  mediately and she did fine. And even now, I wouldn't necessarily feel like super uncom -  fortable with that because I knew what had caused the injury. I knew that this wasn't a  repetitive type of thing. However, having said that, I really believe that we should be at the  point where we are never touching anyone's jaw joint with corticosteroids, that we are only  using PRF. And as a family member or with a family member, if Jenny had that same injury  today, I would definitely do PRF. When she did have a similar injury to her knee, we did  PRF, not corticosteroids. Corticosteroids will help people feel better, but it's not doing any -  thing to regenerate those tissues. Comparing that to hyaluronic acid, the pro of it is it  seems to improve joint lubrication and does provide benefits in osteoarthritis.  [0:24:48]  The con is it's variable with its efficacy so some people will benefit more than others and  these benefits do not seem to be sustained long term. Comparing both of those to platelet-  rich plasma, longer lasting relief than corticosteroids or hyaluronic acid and the big one  there promotes tissue regeneration, of course. The con, higher cost partly because of it not  being covered by medical insurance. It's not that the blood that you drew from the patient  costs more than that steroid. Steroids do have a cost. It's just the fact of insurance cover -  age versus non-insurance coverage.  Limitations & Controversies in Orthopedic Use   [0:25:28]  And this last limitation that I briefly discussed with the insurance coverage is a real big  reason why this is not moving forward faster in the orthopedic world. So the limitations and  controversies include standardization issues, that is not everyone's doing it the same way,  regulatory and insurance challenges with the insurance challenge being the big one. I be -  lieve there are some insurance companies at this point, but more things like TRICARE or  for the veterans that are covering PRP, PRF, but most your Blue Cross and whatnot, they  don't. I'm not aware how this is covered in other countries, but for the most part, from what  I've heard from some of our international members, it's not covered in other countries.  [0:26:17]  09/01/25   Page   of 8   19

SSC 2.0 - 320: History and Evolution of PRP, PRGF & PRF  Patient selection for this. Now we've treated people of all aspects of this with considerably  older patients and they've still done really well, but it's just logical also to assume that  younger people are going to do better. Now if you put this into the area of a typical ortho -  pedic surgeon's office, their patient base skews older, yes? So it's not that common that a  20 year old is going to have osteoarthritis of the knee, whereas 55 year old or 60 year old  would. Well, what's going to be the difference between treating a 65 year old with PRP  versus a 25 year old? Well, the quality of the blood to begin with. And so this can lead to  some of this variability as well of perhaps the orthopedic surgeons being less thrilled with  PRP because the people that they're treating are older and in oftentimes sicker. A lot of the  patients that need joint replacement and whatnot, what else are they? Well, obesity has a  strong correlation there. And so there's going to be some other problems. So because of  all of that, that kind of gets all put into the mix here and can lead to some surgeons them -  selves or physicians in general being like, yeah, we haven't really seen that much im -  provement. But that's due to the patient selection.  [0:27:46]  And then there's always going to be gaps in the research. But there's massive amounts of  research being published all the time in this field. And to keep up on it is dang near a full-  time job. I have Google Alerts on my phone for regenerative medicine. And pretty much  every day, I will get alerted to some article or articles that have been published in regener -  ative medicine. The University of Utah here has a regenerative medicine center that they  are developing. It's not done yet. But in the coming years, it will be developed. And again,  that just kind of shows you that these universities too see the value, even though these  procedures are not being done on a daily basis. They're not being done and covered by  insurances. But they understand the value. And that, of course, is taking the regenerative  medicine to a very different, well, not necessarily very different, but a broader scheme  there of healing livers and kidneys and heart tissue and all that sort of stuff. So I'm not just  talking about improving tennis elbow here. I'm talking the broader range of regenerative  medicine techniques.  TMJ Applications  Anatomical & Functional Complexity of TMJ   [0:29:00]  Let's get back into talking about the applications with TMJ. As you are well aware, the  anatomy of the jaw joint is complicated and lends itself to the utility of PRF. And what I  mean by that is the blood flow to the jaw joint itself is not that great. We have a disc that is  avascular, no blood flow at all. Well, with no blood flow in the disc itself, it has to get its nu -  trients from the surrounding blood flow, the surrounding tissues of the area. The joint is  covered by a capsule. So this capsule that surrounds the joint encloses everything in. So  as you see here, the capsule is down on the neck of the condyle and up on the temporal  09/01/25   Page   of 9   19

SSC 2.0 - 320: History and Evolution of PRP, PRGF & PRF  bone. And when you're doing a joint injection, you are putting that material you're injecting,  so let's say that's anesthetic for an unlocking procedure, or PRF is our topic at hand here,  you're putting that into a closed space. Now, as a reminder, we have a lower joint space  and an upper joint space. And that could make a difference with the outcome. As of today,  when we're doing this, where we're usually freehand injecting the jaw joint, as in we are  not using ultrasound or certainly not x-ray guided injections, we're doing this by touch, it is  not positive which joint space we're going to be in.  [0:30:44]  If we have the patient open wide, that might lead us more into the superior joint space, but  it just depends. And what we're seeing is that the vast majority of patients, however, are  showing improvement with arthritic changes. Maybe, however, as we move more into ul -  trasound guided injections, and we are more confident of getting into the lower joint space,  which therefore would have the material against the condyle and the cortical plate of the  condyle, maybe we will see even better responses to the treatment. Now, if people have  significant arthritic changes, then that disc isn't there anymore, or at least there's a hole in  the disc, and then that's going to communicate through there, isn't it? So you have this  joint capsule, and you have that kind of disc separating it into an upper and a lower com -  partment, but if the disc is damaged or just gone at this point because they've worn  through the retrodiscal tissue, then we just have one joint space. Okay, hopefully that  makes sense.  Rationale for Using Regenerative Therapies in TMD   [0:31:53]  So the rationale for using PRF in the jaw joint is the poor vascularization that I have men -  tioned, inflammatory mediators and chronic TMD, so the patient is constantly bruising their  tissues there and causing this chronic inflammation, and then failure of conservative man -  agement. If you have somebody that just gets bumped in the jaw, and they go to physical  therapy once or twice, and they feel better, they take Advil for a couple days, well then  yeah, we don't need to do PRF. We're not necessarily doing PRF on everybody that walks  in our office.  [0:32:24]  On the other hand, if they've had a relatively recent injury, and they have tried a couple  things, and they're not getting better, then why wouldn't we do PRF? So we don't have to  wait for them to have a chronic pain problem. We want to get to them quickly, and this  goes with any musculoskeletal issue. Why wait until there's further damage? We want to  jump on it. And this is different. If you remember going back into the retrodiscitis lecture in  Level three here, or even in Level one, talking about doing PRF now in accordance with  possibly an Aqualizer, doing this as your first-line treatment to help that patient not only  heal, but actually be a little bit better than they were before. That is a logical approach, in  my opinion. Just a couple more slides to reinforce these points. Once again, you can read  09/01/25   Page   of 10   19

SSC 2.0 - 320: History and Evolution of PRP, PRGF & PRF  here about the effect of this poor vascularization and why that impacts healing. We have  the chronic inflammation, as I mentioned a moment ago, and then, of course, the failure of  conservative management. These are all three things that go into the rationale of why we  would use PRF. Thank goodness that we have this now because historically, these were  the problems that we had, but then our typical management of unloading the joint, splint  therapy by itself, or maybe adding things like steroids through iontophoresis, phonophore -  sis, or even direct injection.  [0:34:06]  Those had limited effects in some people, and now, as I've mentioned before, with PRF,  we are seeing almost universal success where success is measured by the patient feeling  better and having better function, which, of course, is what the patient cares about. I have  yet to have a patient that their chief concern is, will I get my cortical plate back in the jaw  joint? Now, let me state here, when you show people that they've got arthritic change in  their jaw joint, then they can get very concerned about it, but when they're coming into  your office, that's typically not their concern unless it's been pointed out by somebody else.  Usually, the concern is pain and dysfunction. Yes, that's what they're there for you to im -  prove. However, as we do educate them and show them that they've got some arthritic  breakdown, that does become one of their chief complaints and chief concerns because  nobody likes the idea of it getting worse over time, right? Us as adults, if someone points  out to you that you've got a little arthritic changes in your neck or in your lumbar spine or  something like that or in your knee, you are going to kind of maybe even change your life -  style to agree. You're going to be thinking about that all the time. This is the good news  with treating TMJ problems nowadays is we've got... We still have our kind of limiting fac -  tors here, but we can add this to our traditional therapies. The cool thing about the jaw joint  is unlike the knees and the hips, these joints don't bear weight, so they can be pretty  screwed up and do just fine. In our experience, you can actually have changes, regenera -  tive changes in those joint also giving that patient reduced pain, improved function.  Indications & Rationale for PRP/PRF in TMJ Disorders   [0:35:52]  So this relatively recent study down here, 2023, a scoping review looking at use of PRF,  platelet-rich fibrin, injectable PRF administering in the TM joint, and looking at this associ -  ated with osteoarthritis, internal derangements, chronic joint pain, limited opening, and us -  ing this as an adjunct to arthrocentesis, so flushing out the joint and then shooting in the  PRF. And that's great. I like that, particularly compared to what's been done historically.  Flushing out the joint, I have no problem with that. In arthrocentesis or traditional arthro -  centesis, we're going to have, as you see here, the two needles, and they're going to flush  lactated ringers to flush out the joint, getting rid of all the inflammatory products. Historical -  ly, they would then punch in a bunch of steroids and turn off completely the inflammatory  process. Again, that would result in pain relief for the patient usually and increased range  09/01/25   Page   of 11   19

SSC 2.0 - 320: History and Evolution of PRP, PRGF & PRF  of motion because of less pain and things like that. To do this now with PRF is, in my opin -  ion, orders of magnitude improved because we get rid of the inflammatory factors, fine,  and then we add the PRF to start an appropriate healing process. Now, what the vast ma -  jority of these studies will not have, and I'll have one a little bit later, but they will not have  the addition of splint therapy.  [0:37:22]  You may remember me talking in the other sessions, depending on the order that you're  watching these in, of using the crutch analogy that using splint therapy in addition to PRF  in the jaw joint is like putting them on crutches. I think that the impact or the outcomes are  then even better. Having said that, based on the literature references that I've reviewed,  the outcomes are almost always good. So even without this splint therapy and whatnot,  they're good. If you were able to do the PRF injection and not do a splint, that is signifi -  cantly better. As a matter of fact, kind of going on record here as I'm recording this, and my  opinion could change. By the way, that's important. You need to be keeping track of us and  coming to the monthly Zoom meetings and checking out Facebook group and coming to  SSC Live and stuff like that because stuff does change. Remember, SSC 1.0 didn't men -  tion any of the stuff we're talking about right now. It's massively changed how we treat  people with TMJ problems. But as of this recording, I would rather you do PRF injections  on a patient than splint therapy.  [0:38:30]  If you had to choose for some reason, like you just couldn't do both, you could only do  one, PRF would be the way to go. 100%. That'd be what I'd want you to do. Because of  the absolutely amazing effects that we're seeing with pain, with dysfunction, with improving  everything that the patient cares about. And going back to the splint therapy stuff, does  that mean that I don't care now as much about centric relation, having the disc in place  and things like that? No, all of that still is important to me. But what the patient's going to  care the most about is pain and dysfunction. Using PRF, you're going to get rid of that pain  and dysfunction very quickly. And then it's going to be dependent on you and communica -  tion with the patient to help them understand the underlying etiology, which could still be a  sleep apnea problem even. So they could be clenching and grinding their teeth due to an  airway issue. So that doesn't make the etiologies go away. Please, remember that.  [0:39:29]  That's the mistake so many dentists make with the Botox stuff and things like that. I hear  that all the time. And all the dentists out there that make their new magical splints, they fail  to see that the patient wouldn't need a magical splint if we could get to the basis of the eti -  ology. If we could get to the reason that they're clenching and grinding their teeth, what  would they need a magic splint for if we could just stop that? You will be smarter than that.  Now, is PRF getting to the etiology? Well, yes and no. It's getting to the etiology of the  pain. It is helping a healing process. But then we have to ask the obvious question, what  caused it? Is what caused it still around? Is what caused it going to happen again? And if  we believe that what caused it is still around, what caused it is going to cause it again,  then we need to address that. We don't just leave it at that.  09/01/25   Page   of 12   19

SSC 2.0 - 320: History and Evolution of PRP, PRGF & PRF  [0:40:32]  And that's one of the big problems of TMJ treatments over the years is they focused on  kind of the here and now and not the underlying etiology. And then people just continue to  have this problem over and over again. And they are managing their TMJ problem instead  of trying to actually get to the underlying cause and possibly even curing that problem.  When a TMJ problem is directly related to an airway issue, you treat the sleep apnea,  even if that's with CPAP, their TMJ problem goes away. We've seen that hundreds and  hundreds of times. So this is the why we're doing it here. This is the rationale. And it  makes sense. I'm telling you, you need to know how to do this. And that using splint thera -  py in conjunction with the injections will even be more powerful.  PRP in TMJ Disorders: Clinical Evidence   [0:41:16]  Let's talk about some of this clinical evidence of using PRP in the jaw joint and looking at  some of the studies on that. So here we have PRP, young people, and we would expect  this to be more powerful, yes? So if you are drawn better blood with more good stuff in it  and spinning that and sticking it back in them, that's probably going to be better, isn't it? So  let's look at this 2024 study, 128 participants age 18 to 35, mild TMJ problems. They were  randomized into PRP treatment and placebo control groups. PRP was prepared using a  standardized protocol. Intraarticular injections were administered. The placebo injections  mimicked PRP. So that's important to note right there. So their placebo injection, keep in  mind, if I stick you with a needle, so remember when we talked about dry needling, and  that's the physical therapist's term for using acupuncture needles in their treatments,  something's happening there.  [0:42:24]  So you're going in and disturbing, and if they were using a hypodermic needle that is hol -  low, right? Then they would introduce tissue in there. It's got to hit a core. If they were in -  jecting something or just injecting nothing at all, but there was a needle being introduced  into the jaw joint, that's going to cause an inflammatory response, which could actually re -  sult in healing, okay? So starting that healing cascade. So don't just take this as if they did  nothing. So that'd be a different study if they did PRP in one group and nothing in the other  group, but in this study, they did PRP versus a so-called placebo injection. They followed  them up at four and eight weeks, and I'll go ahead and just read this here. The study suc -  cessfully randomized comparable groups, and the PRP treatment group experienced a  significant reduction in TMJ pain using a visual analog scale going from 6.8 plus or minus  1.2 to 2.1 at eight weeks. That's pretty good. The PRP treatment also increased the largest  opening of the mouth going from 38 millimeters pretreatment to 43.5, so almost normal,  and the number of lateral movements or the distance of lateral movements, 12.3 to 14.9,  while the placebo group had very few changes. Positive patient-reported outcomes on dai -  ly activities were observed. No serious complications reported. Continuing, the study pro -  09/01/25   Page   of 13   19

SSC 2.0 - 320: History and Evolution of PRP, PRGF & PRF  vides evidence supporting the efficacy of PRP in reducing TMJ pain, improving function,  improving quality of life in young adults with mild TMD. Results underscore the potential of  PRP as a minimally invasive intervention for TMJ disorders. Absolutely.  PRP as Pain Management   [0:44:11]  Here's a case study that is pretty cool. So in this case study, they took a patient with  chronic TMJ problems and gave the patient three intraarticular PRP injections. They  spaced those injections four weeks apart and then followed up with the patient two years  after that last session. So no additional treatment was done after that last session. Two  years later, followed up with the patient again who had chronic TMJ pain prior to this  treatment, and here's what they said. The patient was completely symptom-free even after  24 months since the last PRP injection session. Conclusion, intraarticular injection of PRP  seems to be a safe, effective, and cheap pain management method for chronic pain result -  ing from TMJ disorder. Okay, interesting to me. So this is a case report in the Iraqi medical  journal, and notice that they say cheap. Okay, how come a little earlier I mentioned that  one of the cons of PRP in the musculoskeletal or the orthopedic surgery field was ex -  pense? As I said then, it's because insurance. If it's not covered by insurance, then that's  "expensive" even though, again, as of this recording, it is typical for PRP injections for the  knee to be charged at about $300 to $500 an injection. That's really not that much money,  is it? Now, are they doing okay financially, the doctors that are charging that much for it?  Yeah, sure, of course they are, but I think it's important here that we tend to see this, and if  you're paying attention here, you'll notice that a lot of these studies aren't necessarily from  the United States. So these are countries where they're looking at best bang for the buck  type of stuff, and so I just thought that was interesting here that they literally say the word  cheap in their study conclusions there.  [0:46:11]  Here's a comparative study between arthrocentesis plus PRP and PRP alone. Going to the  results here, arthrocentesis plus PRP versus PRP alone found both methods effective. The  arthrocentesis plus PRP showed superior results in alleviating the pain, headaches, en -  hancing jaw mobility, but of course there's increased costs associated with arthrocentesis,  and there's not long-term follow-up in this. Again, for me and my family and my patients,  just go straight to the PRP. I would kind of hold back the arthrocentesis plus PRP for those  who are in severe acute pain. That could be indicated, but for most people, that's not going  to be necessary.  Arthrocentesis & Injection Technique   [0:46:56]  09/01/25   Page   of 14   19

SSC 2.0 - 320: History and Evolution of PRP, PRGF & PRF  A couple comments on arthrocentesis and joint injection technique. For arthrocentesis,  we're going to flush out the joint with two needles. Typically, this is done under local anes -  thesia or actually very commonly in the United States anyway under sedation. They will  put the patient to sleep, and then they'll use two large needles and flush lactated ringers  through the jaw joint. That's done thusly. I have participated in lots of these arthrocentesis  before. Pretty cool. You can get those in there, and since you're using two needles, you  know for sure that you're in the joint space because as you push the fluid through one  needle, it comes out the other needle. So we're not wondering if we're in the right spot or  not. For the jaw joint, typically we're injecting about a cc.  [0:47:46]  You could inject a little bit more, but in our practice, we're doing about a CC. Now, this is  interesting to me. This study here, and I've seen this fairly consistently throughout multiple  different studies, and I want to point this out here. It says that one scoping review, and it's  right here, used one to two millimeters of IPRF, injectable PRF, prepared at 700 RPMs at  three minutes. That is a lot shorter than what we are typically doing. So what does that  mean? So I think that the technique that you will learn in how to do PRF, and within these  core videos, I have video from Frank Henrich and Kevin Mangelson in the techniques that  they're using now, and again, over time, these are going to change. However, we are do -  ing a little bit different techniques in how we do the centrifugation of the blood. But I think  the bottom line is, though, these other studies that were done using these other methods  still had positive results. But do keep that in mind. So if you come across a study and it's  like, oh, okay, well, this was only a little bit better than this or whatever, take that with a  grain of salt. This is one of the problems with PRF-PRP is it's not apples to apples, right?  So we're not saying this drug that was always that drug in a study. Every time you see  PRP or PRF, you kind of got to dive into, well, how did they prepare it? And what kind of  centrifuge did they use? And how long did they do that? And where did they pull that out  from?  [0:49:31]  When you learn the techniques you'll learn, if you haven't already, then that standardizes  at least what we're doing, which is really important, I think, amongst our group. And we can  know if you are not having the same results that the rest of us are, then we can kind of  look at that a little bit more closely and say, okay, is there something you're doing different  than the rest of us? But having said that, virtually every study that I've ever seen, the pa -  tient did better. So there seems to be a wide range of acceptability here in how things are  prepared and things like that. So you don't need to freak out about, well, if you were 30  seconds longer or shorter. As a matter of fact, as you'll learn from Kevin and Frank, they  talk all the time about doing their typical spin, which is typically around seven, eight min -  utes, and then pulling out the test tube, looking at it, and it just doesn't look right. There's a  look that they are going for, and then they'll put it in and spin it longer, and then it will look  right.  [0:50:34]  09/01/25   Page   of 15   19

SSC 2.0 - 320: History and Evolution of PRP, PRGF & PRF  Okay, so definitely it completely makes sense that every individual's blood is going to be a  little bit different, right? How hydrated are they? Did they just have a burger and fries? How  old are they? What elevation are you at? All sorts of things are going to come into play  here when we're dealing with individual's blood. So we're just going to take that into ac -  count that there will be some variability with this from each individual patient. Don't get  worked up on the recipe. As dentists, one of my colleagues that you probably know from  Spencer Study Club, Michael Goldberg, he always likes to say, dentists always want to  know WTF, which stands for “what's the formula?” And I know we get that from doing com -  posites and doing everything kind of regimented of you do it this way to get this result. This  is different. So you're going to learn the overall principles. And when you take the course, if  you haven't taken the course already, do make sure you're looking around on everyone  that's doing it and looking for what that should look like. OK, and watch the videos with  Kevin and Frank and learn what you are looking for.  Dosing Protocols: Single vs Multiple Injections   [0:51:53]  What about how often we need to do this? So this study in 2022 looked at single PRP in -  jection versus multiple. And you can see here that there's different protocols. And what  they looked at was people that had one shot or that had a series of three to five in this  study was weekly or monthly intervals. And then they followed them up at 12 months, say -  ing right here after 12 months, no significant differences in pain scores or maximum initial  opening were observed. Both single and multiple injections yielded similar improvements,  suggesting little additive benefit from multiple injections. So you may be wondering one  shot versus multiple shot. At this point, we are usually doing multiple treatments for the pa -  tient. We have had some patients that have done just one or maybe two and have done  extremely well.  [0:52:55]  However, we also believe that there is some additive benefit of the treatment itself, cumu -  lative benefit and additional benefit at doing this procedure at multiple times. Plus, there's  the benefit of seeing the patient and seeing how they're doing and being able to pivot if  you need to. Nevertheless, in the literature, it shows that on a long term follow up, that  there was similar results. And these similar results were super positive. So people who had  a single injection versus people that had three to five injections over a series over several  weeks or several months, everybody did better. That's really a cool point to keep in mind.  [0:53:44]  However, in this 2022 study, they looked at multiple, five injections and felt that there was  evidence of incremental improvement and say here in summary, some evidence suggests  both single and multiple injections are effective with diminishing returns beyond one to  three sessions. So this is part of the reasoning and part of the evidence that we've looked  at for our clinical decisions. And right now, the vast majority of our patients, it is three injec -  09/01/25   Page   of 16   19

SSC 2.0 - 320: History and Evolution of PRP, PRGF & PRF  tions, typically three to four weeks apart between those injections. In a moment, I'll show  you some cases and in virtually all of those cases, that is what was followed. In this study,  they took patients and randomly put them into one of three groups, arthrocentesis alone,  arthrocentesis plus hyaluronic acid or arthrocentesis plus injectable PRF. What they found  is with pain, mouth opening and joint sounds, all three groups did better.  [0:54:50]  However, the injectable PRF group was the best of all of those. And to point out this com -  ment here at the end, there was also significant improvement in TMJ clicking two weeks  post treatment that was sustained thereafter. That's interesting to me. And we will learn  this as time goes on, but there's a decent amount of literature at this point that talks about  this, of reduction of joint sounds. Now, if you go back to the anatomy of reducing disc dis -  placements, if it was true that the disc displacement got better, so remember reducing disc  displacement, they're off the disc. And then when they open, it pops into place. So this is  curious to me of this idea that giving PRF injections can make the clicking go away, be -  cause that actually doesn't make a lot of sense anatomically. In order to have the click go  away, you've got two options. One, disc goes back onto the condyle, which would result in  what? What would the patient have if they've gone from disc out of place anteriorly, I'll give  you a hint, and the condyle appears superiorly, because there's no room for the disc on  top, and now all of a sudden the disc in place. Think of what happens when we do oral ap -  pliance therapy for sleep apnea. If that occurred, the patient would have a posterior open  bite, because that disc is now in the right spot, and that's going to bring their jaw into a dif -  ferent position. The other route of making joint noises go away would be what?  [0:56:28]  Instead of popping into place, now we aren't popping into place. And that makes me a little  concerned in some of these studies, and that's something that we've seen over the years  is people that get arthrocentesis for a non-reducing disses placement, and they go to the  physical therapist, and they're able to open way bigger, even though they still can't open  three fingers, and then it's assumed, it's like, oh yeah, they're good to go here, and then  we find out that only 10% of the time is that patient actually getting back on the disc. So be  a little bit wary in the literature here and with your patients yourself of this idea that we're  going to give an injection and that's going to make the joint noises go away. I am suspi -  cious of that, just anatomically that doesn't make a lot of sense to me.  PRP & PRP in Myofascial Pain   [0:57:16]  Now let's talk about some of the literature on using PRP or PRF in myalgia and myofascial  pain. In this study, they kind of looked at just the comparison of using PRP versus dry  needling or other injection techniques and didn't really see a huge difference. And to me,  this kind of makes sense. If you go back on the muscular trigger points section in level  09/01/25   Page   of 17   19

SSC 2.0 - 320: History and Evolution of PRP, PRGF & PRF  three here, what did I say is the most important thing according to Dr. Travell? It's that local  twitch response, right? It's the hitting the trigger point and the what you inject is far less  important as how you inject. And this seems to be the case here too, that whether you are  dry needling, whether you're using local anesthetic or you're using PRF, the results seem  to be similar. Now I would advocate for using PRF in these injections if you thought that  there was healing that needed to occur and you were confident in what was causing the  person to have the myofascial trigger points.  [0:58:23]  Now in this study, on the other hand, PRP was shown to be superior to injecting saline.  Now I would make a case though that had they maybe, no offense to the authors here, but  if they would have done the classic trigger point injection techniques and gone for that lo -  cal twitch response, it may not have mattered. But nevertheless, it did. So I think some -  times things like PRF and particularly things like Botox can mask poor technique. Because  with Botox, you're of course are paralyzing that area of the muscle.  [0:59:05]  That motor unit can't work anymore. And if that's been causing some pain, then the pa -  tient's going to have less pain. With PRF, you are going to cause a localized healing re -  sponse and that could be good too, even if that trigger point remains, but ultimately is go -  ing to come back with the pain. In this study, they compared PRP to lidocaine injection and  PRP to sham dry needling and found that the PRP was superior in both cases. Now all the  patients did get better, but that the PRP was just a little bit better than these other tech -  niques. And then as I mentioned a moment ago, this study looked at PRP versus Botox  and here found that Botox revealed the most pronounced positive effect.  [0:59:54]  That doesn't surprise me too much. If someone is having muscle pain and then you turn  off the muscle, then that could certainly result in them feeling better. And we still use, as of  this recording, we are still using Botox in our practice less than we have in the past for var -  ious reasons. Not the least of which is Botox is far more expensive and every time you re -  constitute a vial of Botox, you have to use the whole thing or it's only going to last for a lit -  tle while and they're wicked expensive. And the cost of the patient has to be significant to  make up for the cost of the Botox.  [1:00:36]  So we are using more PRF in these cases But for me, if I had a trigger point in any mus -  cle, I would prefer PRF, and probably you would too, because I know that the problem is  not a Botox deficiency, as I like to say. The problem is there's a problem there. There's a  physical problem with that muscle, and PRF just makes more sense to me that we're trying  to heal that problem than we're trying to mask it.  [1:01:08]  Not to say that Botox only masks it. Botox has some other things that it's doing too, but  bottom line, for me and my family, I would rather do a PRF injection than a Botox injection.  Nevertheless, give it its due. In this study and other studies, patients will often report better  pain relief with the Botox. Just the bummer being that they typically have to have that re -  09/01/25   Page   of 18   19

SSC 2.0 - 320: History and Evolution of PRP, PRGF & PRF  done unless they made the changes that are going to keep that myofascial trigger point  from coming back.  Ultrasound-Guided PRP Injections   [1:01:38]  And just a quick word about using ultrasound-guided injections. So we are never using ul -  trasound at this point for muscular injections or tendon injection or whatnot. That's always  been done by touch. However, we are starting to do joint injections with ultrasound, and  we'll talk about that at another time here of the improvement in your accuracy with that. If  we have someone with degenerative joint disease, it doesn't really matter. We don't have  that inferior and superior joint space anymore because it's all destroyed. But if you are try -  ing to get into an inferior joint space on someone who still has a distinct inferior and supe -  rior joint space, then ultrasound could be very useful. Again, this is something that we are  teaching now in our PRF courses and making the dentist more comfortable knowing that  they are putting their needle where they think that they're putting their needle. Perhaps in  the future, this will be more common even in muscular injections or temporal tendon injec -  tions or occipital neuralgia type of cases, things like that.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 19   19

