SSC 2.0 - 323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  SSC 2.0   Level 3  323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  [intro music]  Photobiomodulation in the Modern Dental Practice  Advancing Sleep, TMD, and Wellness Therapies   [0:00:17]  Dr. Rahul Desai:   I just want to preface this by saying I have fully drank the Kool-Aid of  photobiomodulation, or the Celsius of... I should stop drinking this stuff, but the Celsius of  photobiomodulation. And just take everything I say with a grain of salt, but I'm totally en -  thused by this and really excited to bring this to you. I'll preface this with saying I truly be -  lieve that every household in the world needs to leverage this technology for the better -  ment of their family's health. It's that simple. We'll start with that. And then I'm going to talk  to you about the details of this. If you are interested in this, I think it would be very valuable  to go back to that last lecture. We dove into the science a little bit more. And as maybe a  teaser for September, it's September, I believe, in California, I'm going to be doing some  more detailed teaching. I will spend some time on photobiomodulation, kind of update  some of the science, some of the literature. And if there's any interest, I can go dive into  the kind of the deep science. But I wanted to take actually a step back in the beginning of  this presentation. And it might be a little bit cheesy, but I really think it's super interesting.  [0:01:37]  It's like, why does this work? Like just for humanity, why is this medicine actually working?  And to take a step back and really look at it. So we've, modern day medicine, we've fo -  cused on managing symptoms, we're prescribing chemicals, we're forcing changes on the  body. But inside of us, there is an innate ability to heal. And I'm a radiologist and an MD.  How did I come to becoming kind of so nature driven and that our body can heal itself? It's  really from regenerative medicine, right? That gave me this insight. I was not like that. I  was very much an allopathic physician and I'm radiologist, black and white. But what re -  generative medicine showed me things that I never believed could happen. And then my  eyes opened, my mind opened, my heart opened to this. And so each inside of us, there's  an untapped pharmacy. There's an intelligence that's there. And what we've learned over  time and millennia, and I think people even before, modern medicine understood this is the  power of the sun, the power of light. All organisms, almost all, 99.999% of all organisms on  Earth are fed by the sun.  09/01/25   Page   of 1   21

SSC 2.0 - 323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  Photobiomodulation From Dawn to DNA   [0:02:52]  If we lose that source, life dies. And so that is the kind of this key and it's a catalyst for re -  generation. And let's get a little bit primal on this and then we're going to get to modern  day. But I think this is really compelling and interesting. So if we look at it deep in our tis -  sues, we carry these mitochondria. These are ancient remnants of light dependent unicel -  lular organisms. And they're little powerhouses. And these power plants are still wired to  respond to light energy. So when we deliver the right amount of energy at the right dose,  we're not just shining light on our bodies. We're activating metabolism, restoring balance,  reducing inflammation. We're fueling the body's repair mechanism. And it's sort of like pho -  tosynthesis, except in a human form. And our bodies have evolved over a 300,000,  400,000 years under the rhythm of natural light. And only in the past few thousand years  have we been indoors. We've been outdoors. We are animals. And we kind of forget that  over time. But over these thousands of years, our bodies have evolved and especially red  and near infrared light at dawn and dusk. Our bodies evolved through this. And there's key  biologic transitions during these times. Sunrise triggers wakefulness, metabolism, cortisol  regulation in the evening. Sunset prepares us for recovery, melatonin release, growth  hormone release, cortisol modulation and reduction. And prepares us for cellular repair  and healing.  Infrared Lights   [0:04:24]  And so why this red and near infrared light? And why at those times? So if you look at it  just scientifically, when the sun is at 15 degrees and even negative 5 degrees at the hori -  zon, the light has to travel through a long path. It has to go through a lot more atmosphere.  So the ultraviolet rays, the blues, the yellows, they all get scattered. So what actually tra -  verses through are the red and infrared. And so our body has been tuned for those wave -  lengths. So it actually speaks the language of our cells. And it's just, to me, that's really  cool and fascinating. So if photobiomodulation, it's about taking the best parts of the sun's  spectrum and then leveraging it. Taking out the stuff we don't need, just like with orthobio -  logics, leveraging those parts of it that help healing and support recovery, regeneration,  performance, and applying those to the clinical setting. So I just find that super fascinating.  And so what we've taken is this energy spectrum, which is even broader than this.  [0:05:24]  This is just the visible spectrum in an ultraviolet and infrared. And we look at that, and so  we have the purples, the reds, the colors of the rainbow, ultraviolet. So these are shorter  wavelengths, but higher frequency. So that's ultraviolet. And we have these infrared, which  are longer wavelengths and lower frequency. So they're infrared. And there's different ap -  plications. So if you think about this, these are medicinal waves. These things do things to  our bodies. The red and the near-infrared, the NIR, right? So those are this between 600  09/01/25   Page   of 2   21

SSC 2.0 - 323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  and 800, 900. Those medicines do the same things to our body. So I want you to kind of  think about those as being together, the red and the near-infrared. Even though we can  see one in the visible spectrum, we can't see the other ones that are longer wavelength,  the near-infrared. They're doing essentially the same things to our tissue. Now, as we go  to this mid-infrared and far-infrared, and I want to differentiate that, you'll hear that clinical -  ly, is those target a different photoreceptor, right? So those photons are coming into the  body. They're creating a change. This red and near-infrared, they focus on this specific  protein enzyme in the mitochondria called cytochrome C oxidase.  [0:06:45]  These other wavelengths, the longer ones, they target water. There's other photoreceptors  in the body. The main ones are like heme, the cytochrome C oxidase, water. So when  these longer wavelengths target water, they heat the water and they produce heat. So  that's why you hear of saunas. So mid, long, far-infrared, they're heating. So they're heat -  ing water and they have great different effects, but that's not photobiomodulation per se as  far as like what we're leveraging it for. It's creating heat. There's some thermal effects with  that.  What is Photo-Bio-Modulation?   [0:07:17]  So photobiomodulation in our, what we're going to use it for is targeting the specific wave -  lengths, the specific medicine. These red and near-infrared wavelengths and stimulating  the mitochondria to produce ATP energy and then all the downstream catalyst for all the  downstream healing, reduction in inflammation and enhanced tissue repair. Why do we  need that? Well, there was a study that came out of Harvard and the NIH several years  ago, about a decade or two ago, and it showed that we were spending 93%, the average  American spends 93% of their time indoors. We just talked about, we spent several hun -  dred thousand years outdoors and now very quickly with the Industrial Revolution and  housing and electricity, suddenly we're indoors almost all the time.  [0:08:09]  You don't think that's going to have a biologic, a detrimental effect or a change at least in  our biologic systems? It's kind of fascinating. So what we're doing is supplementing the  light. And they've even shown with UV, you know, that UV gets a really bad rap. Sun for  skin cancer and all the detrimental aging effects. It's needed. It converts, just one of the  examples is creation of vitamin D. There's a lot of benefits, bone health, systemic health  with getting that energy source. One of the fascinating papers that one of the spouses of a  Spencer member sent me and I reviewed it, it's really cool, is that there is actually a pho -  toprotective effect of red and near-infrared light on our tissues so that we can accept UV  light in the middle of the day. So you wake up in the morning, you get these protective  healing effects. Even if you get a lot of sun exposure in the middle of the day, there are dif -  ferent genes that are expressed that are protected against cancer. How cool is that? So  09/01/25   Page   of 3   21

SSC 2.0 - 323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  the body's smart. But we've now changed our environment and we have to change our  thinking.   And so, looking at this, the photobiomodulation is basically a supplement.  How PBM Awakens Cellular Healing   [0:09:19]  So this is going back to some of the things that we spoke about last year. And I think it's  very pertinent and if you'd like a deeper dive, go back into that or reach out to us. But what  happens is this red and near-infrared light, it gets absorbed by these photoreceptors, es -  pecially cytochrome C oxidase. When these wavelengths hit that, they energize it and that  releases nitric oxide. So normally in a kind of a dilapidated state or low energy state, the  cytochrome C oxidase holds onto nitric oxide. And it's part of the electron transport chain.  Remember back in chemistry and med school or dental school, these electron transport  chains and using glycolysis and pyruvate and then getting NADH and FADH2 and energy  production. ATP production for the cell. That process, when it's in a low energy state, that  cytochrome C oxidase is holding onto, NO and you get about two ATP per cycle. When  you shine light or when the tissue is exposed to this red near-infrared energy, the cy -  tochrome C oxidase releases nitric oxide. Nitric oxide is a vasodilator. It's an anti-inflam -  matory. It's a powerful medicine in and of itself.  [0:10:34]  So there's a local positive tissue effect. So if anybody's using lasers, they probably have  low-level light therapy. They have this background. But there's a really positive effect of  just releasing nitric oxide into the tissues. So that's one benefit. When oxygen then binds  to the cytochrome C oxidase, the ATP production goes from 2 to 32. So it's a 16-fold in -  crease in energy of that cell. That cell is now able to use that energy for all of its cellular  processes, for tissue repair, for protein creation. There's reactive oxygen species that are  released as part of this. They stress the cell. It's a hormetic stress. So it's a beneficial  stress. It's a short burst of stress. And there's increased gene expression. Tissue repair  proteins are created. There's a stem cell activation, so more stem cells are circulating in  the tissues. We talked about that. There are studies out there that are showing that there's  about a 300%, after even 15 minutes of photobiomodulation, to a small area, to the tibia,  and a 300% increase in circulating CD34 cells, a 1000% increase in macrophages within  two hours, and that lasted for several days.  [0:11:42]  So there's a powerful restorative effect of photobiomodulation in the tissues, and you can  see that even just a local exposure can create a positive systemic effect. And that reduces  oxidative stress, reduces inflammation, and leads to whole body and local healing. As you  guys start to use this, I always go back to my elevator speech, I gotta have these thoughts  prepared, and I like this as kind of the holy trinity of photobiomodulation. And so to break it  down really simply, what are we doing to tissues? We're enhancing mitochondrial function,  so we're making the tissues more efficient, so all the processes become more efficient.  09/01/25   Page   of 4   21

SSC 2.0 - 323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  We're reducing pain and inflammation. The red and near-infrared light work directly on the  capsaicin receptors, the TRPV1 receptors, they change the calcium influx, and they modu -  late the pain receptor's effect. So when you use this, when patients are exposed to the red  and near-infrared light, especially if they're having pain or discomfort, they may, not every -  body, but probably the vast majority of patients that we've experienced, or myself, I get an  analgesic benefit almost right away. And that is a large part due to this. They're not sud -  denly healing, but they're getting this modulation of those pain receptors. Over time, that  can become healing, and that's this repeated exposure, this cumulative benefit.  [0:13:00]  And lastly, stem cells. So performance, pain and inflammation, and regeneration. That's  your elevator speech if you need one. And basically, what is it? It's a biologic amplifier. It's  turning up the healing, and with what we're doing on a day-to-day basis, whether it be  general dentistry, whether it be sleep, whether it be TMJ, TMD, all of us need this. Whether  it be just living, like having birthdays, we need biologic amplification. So the medicine to -  morrow is not swallowed, it's illuminated. And I really believe this, and I think it's something  that we want to develop within the RedVive clinical system. And the applications of this are  vast, because it's working at a cellular level. Last year I went to the World Congress, and  one of the sessions, a very hotly debated session, was how do we keep this photobio -  modulation from being snake oil? Because it fixes everything, because it's working on a  cellular level, and it really does. If you look at the applications that we're seeing, and this  is... There's 13,000 articles that have been published on photobiomodulation and health,  and it covers all fields.  Light Pathway   [0:14:08]  I was just reading some articles, yes, I'll present one here, Interesting on blood clotting,  five-fold reduction with red light exposure for post-operative blood clots. And it's pretty  amazing. One of the things in that study was from UPMC, this is not a very high-level aca -  demic system. They published this data. What they noticed retrospectively were that this  was one of the animal studies, and they looked at human data too. One of the animal stud -  ies showed that the blind mice didn't have the positive effect, which is super weird. So  they're trying to figure that out, because it was whole body radiation. And so there are two  light pathways, and something that we really didn't cover last time, and the more and  more, I have this pseudo master's degree in photobiomodulation now, maybe. It's like a  year of deep dive, so maybe not master's. I'll get there. But the two pathways that are real -  ly interesting are one, the tissue pathway. That's the one I focused on as a musculoskele -  tal doctor, like biting up the tissue, getting that local healing, getting that local effect, tem -  poromandibular joint, dentistry, all of the different things. But the second pathway, which is  super powerful, is this optical pathway. And that really ties in well with what we talked  about with dawn and dusk.  09/01/25   Page   of 5   21

SSC 2.0 - 323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  Part of Sleep Hygiene (Red Light Panels)   [0:15:26]  And I'll talk a little bit about sleep hygiene. So there are two pathways. The pathway that  we spoke about in all of these cellular reactions that we were discussing, that's the cy -  tochrome C oxidase and affecting those tissues. And all of that, that's the local effect. It  has a local effect. There's more stem cells released, and that can create a systemic effect.  But it's different than this optical pathway. This optical pathway, what's happening is those  red, especially the red wavelengths, are hitting the melanopsin receptors in the retina. And  they connect to the suprachiasmatic nucleus, and they affect hormonal changes. And then  they reset or modulate our circadian rhythms. And it can be a super powerful effect. And so  we're going to see that that cytochrome C oxidase effect, this is this one here, stronger  cells, stronger tissue, less inflammation. Then you have this optic pathway that's modulat -  ing circadian rhythms. And what it's doing is modulating, like we talked about, our cortisol,  it's modulating melatonin, and it's modulating growth hormone. And it's affecting sleep  powerfully. And something that is really interesting is with sleep hygiene, one of the things  that we've started at our home is 30 minutes before bedtime. We have the whole family in  the living room.  [0:16:37]  Everybody's doing homework and reading. And we have five kids, and they're kind of mel -  lowing out. And they have a lot of blue light exposure with all their devices. We turn on the  red light, the large panel. It sits in our living room. It gets used every day. And we deliver  that energy, that spectrum, for about 30 minutes before bed. And everybody's been sleep -  ing better. We've been doing it for now about a month. And the more and more I under -  stand this, that's really cool with either of these devices, part of sleep hygiene. And I'd love  feedback from it, is just turning that machine on. You can set it in the bedroom, it's going to  light up your bedroom or your living room with those red photons, the red light photons,  and they're going to start affecting those changes. It's an anti-blue light effect, basically.  And put it on for a 20-minute timer, brush your teeth, get in your PJs, read a book, go to  bed. They will penetrate your eyelids, and they'll still affect a change, and it'll shut off in 20  minutes. And see what type of changes that you might see. And that's why looking at this  device, there's the local tissue effect, there's the systemic effect, and now there's a circa -  dian rhythm effect.  [0:17:51]  And it's really cool to think about that, how it can affect not only ourselves, but our patients.  And the other part of this is using it in the morning. And that's where I found a lot of value  is using it twice a day. And my regimen, doesn't have to be everybody's regimen, is about  7 minutes, 7 to 10 minutes twice a day. Energize in the morning, create the balance and  the parasympathetic response in the evening. And then if you do have local injuries and  you're getting through something, then you can always do more locally. This is the traveler  09/01/25   Page   of 6   21

SSC 2.0 - 323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  version, and so kind of the 60. So 60 LEDs, these 600 nanometer wavelengths. We took a  very well-developed commercial grade photobiomodulation panel and we upgraded it with  changing the LED spectrum. So we really focused on what we wanted, what the literature  was demonstrating. We changed the beam angle so it can penetrate more deeply into the  tissues. And this is what we've created. It's kind of custom designed from all of the learn -  ings that we've had. And so this is the 635, 670, 810 and 850 are the most powerful activa -  tors of the cytochrome C oxidase in the near infrared spectrum.  [0:19:05]  And here's, I think Dr. Morrelli sent us this. So applying this locally, it's great for skin. I just  talked to one of my really close friends. He has had it for almost a year. He is a complete  convert. He said it's changed his face, his skin, his health, his hair. He said he never had  bushy eyebrows and they're like hitting his glasses. So it's kind of interesting. Here's the  full body panel. So this is the red by 300. So there's 300 LEDs, 150 in the red, 150 in the  near infrared. And this is what we have in our living room. This is a stand for the floor. This  has been really good for us at home. So this is my 15-year-old daughter. She's a rock  climber, competitive, always hurting something. And she kind of lives in front of that. So  different body parts and every one of our family members uses it almost on a daily basis.  It's very well utilized. And I do my stretching and do a little bit of yoga sitting on the floor  using this. The other way to do this, this is in our clinic. This is on a stand and so this  stand, you can have it vertical, you can have it flat or any other angle between. And this is  designed mainly for the larger panel, but now the smaller panel, the newer versions that  are coming out are going to have the connector for that. So then this can be used in clinic.  If somebody wants to do this before and after cases, so you could have a small panel on  here as well, or two and have them roll up together. You'd have to have two bases, roll  them up together and then have both sides of the face covered if that's something that's of  interest.  Medicine Being the Wavelength   [0:20:55]  We've had these third party tested. So we talked about the medicine being the wave -  length. So the wavelengths, I want you to think about that like Advil and Tylenol and antibi -  otic or whatever that, that's the medicine. That's the medicine. I'll ask the group out there,  will one milligram of Advil work the same as 800 milligrams of Advil? No, absolutely not. So  if you take one milligram of Advil, it doesn't do anything. Does Advil suck? I mean, for me,  it's magical. No, it doesn't suck.   It's actually really good, but you have to take the right  dose. So the wavelength, so that's the concern when you're going through all these differ -  ent devices, is there enough power? Are you going to get enough dose? So the first thing  you have to worry about is the right wavelength, the medicine. Okay, so we have the right  wavelengths, we have the right medicine. Next, do you have the right dose? How do you  get the right doses? First, you start with power because that's one thing you can't control.  09/01/25   Page   of 7   21

SSC 2.0 - 323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  The company or whoever you buy it from, they control the power because that's the irradi -  ance. So we've had this third party tested and validated. So anywhere between about 5  milliwatts per centimeter squared to 100 milliwatts per centimeter squared is out in the lit -  erature, maybe 150. So that's the... If you look at those studies, there have been positive  effects from those energy spectrum. So it's a pretty wide spectrum, so that you can get  good effects. Now, if you look at the studies, if it's a very low milliwatt wavelength, it's usu -  ally for superficial structures, red light for skin, for fine lines, for wrinkles. As we want to get  deeper and more penetrating, you're going to need more energy, more power density.  [0:22:31]  And so we have a very powerful light, very powerful device. And so the therapeutic irradi -  ance is sustained across all of these practical wave distance or distances, treatment dis -  tances. So at 3 inches, it's about 300, at 6 inches about 75, and about 12 inches, it's about  50. And this is looking at all parameters. There's an inverse square law that the power  drops off, the inverse square, but there's also a convergence of light because these are  sources and the beam angle spreads, and so we can get... That's why at 50, you'd think  that would probably be, if you use just a pure inverse square law, that's gonna be like 20,  19 or 20. But that's not how that works. That would assume exact parallel light distribution.  So there's convergence, and that's why as you get even closer, it's not gonna go up like at  an inch, it's not gonna be 2,700 milliwatts per centimeter squared. So that would be pure  mathematics, and then there's physics and reality, okay? But very powerful device, and the  two went the other way. Those are the applications. I'm gonna go into a little bit more de -  tail.  Power of Regenerative Medicine and Photobiomodulation   [0:23:37]  I wanted to, I asked if I could put one case in, and I know a lot of you guys have seen this,  but this is where I... These types of things convince me about the power of regenerative  medicine, and I consider photobiomodulation a part of that. So this was a patient that we  used regenerative medicine and everyday photobiomodulation. In this case, it still blows  me away. This was a professional horse rider, got kicked by the horse, complete MCL tear,  complete ACL, and complete medial patellofemoral ligaments. It was her horse, got  spooked, kicked her, she looked down at her knee, her kneecap was hanging off to the  side, and so all of those ligaments had been destroyed, and this was three surgeries, 18  months of rehab. The patient lived in Atlanta. They flew to see us in Portland. We did or -  thobiologic stem cells into all those structures. Somehow, her meniscus didn't tear and no  cartilage damage, magically, after getting, but all the soft tissues were disrupted. So we did  bone marrow fat platelets injected the completely destroyed ACL, injected the MCL, inject -  ed those medial patellofemoral ligaments.  [0:24:49]  09/01/25   Page   of 8   21

SSC 2.0 - 323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  A few weeks later, a patient was well-to-do, so they kept going to the hospital and getting  MRIs, and so that was really nice to help elucidate what was happening. A few weeks lat -  er, the ACL, the lax, actually started to connect, shockingly. You're seeing a little bit of con -  nection there, because it was completely disrupted here. We were working closely with her  physical therapist, and they were doing biodex data and KT-1000 for translation of the  joint, so looking at stability. In December, a month or so later, the ACL looks even more ro -  bust. The ligaments are starting to regenerate. The MCL is starting to heal, and this is a  notch view of that, this dark ligament here, that it's healing, and then this was seven  months later with, she left with Band-Aids that it was taut and completely vibrant, and the  MRI was read as normal. So this is the MCL. You can see that's healing. MCLs will heal  over time. We kind of aided that, so that's zero, three, and seven months, and then here  was the progression of healing from completely ruptured ACL, seven weeks. It's connect -  ing, but it's lax. 11 weeks, it's thicker, more robust, but still a little bit lax, and at seven  months, it's taut and normal-looking. So that's the power of regenerative medicine and  photobiomodulation.  Autologous Intra-lesional BLP   [0:26:08]  And here's another case. This one is really close to my heart, because this is me. This was  a 90% tear of my Achilles tendon. We did the same combination of orthobiologics, and this  is a year later, and it was completely healed, and now I'm jumping, running, and still don't  jump very high or run very fast, but I'm doing those things, and completely without surgery.  And I still red light those areas and starting to develop power.  LED   vs   & Laser   [0:26:37]  So my next discussion is, is it as good as laser, or is it different than laser, or how do we...  If somebody has laser, is applying that in the clinic? We talked about, initially, I was gonna  present this as LED versus laser, and it's really not. This is an LED, and this is about pho -  tobiomodulation. We just spoke so highly of what we're doing and how much I believe in it,  and it's really one medicine and multiple tools. We're taking different tools to deliver the  same energy, to deliver the low-level light therapy and all the different things that we've  called it over the years, into the tissue.  [0:27:16]  And so laser, highly precise, focused application, ideal for clinical applications, higher  costs, smaller treatment area. LED, broader, safer, it's class two, some minimal heating  effects, you're not worried about burning, though with some of the new pulsed lasers,  that's really not a big concern anyway. It's accessible, it's affordable, and it can be in the  home. It's very easy to integrate. So together, it's really not about choosing sides, it's about  09/01/25   Page   of 9   21

SSC 2.0 - 323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  choosing complete care. And they're not competing, they're complementing one another.  So LED laser can be a very comprehensive PBM package. So laser initiates, you can treat  in office, it's gonna boost healing. With LED, it's supporting, maintaining, and accelerating,  extending your clinical walls to the patients. If you don't have one, I guess there would be  an argument, you can have that discussion of, do you feel like you can get all of the bene -  fits from an LED? Potentially, I'm very biased, so remember, take it with a grain of salt.  One of the godfathers of photobiomodulation is Dr. Hamblin, Michael Hamblin from Mass  General. He's been doing this for decades. In 2017, they came out with a discussion that  laser and LEDs don't have much difference. Laser has been much more studied, it's more  of the legacy therapy, but the depth of penetration, when they looked at the research,  they're very, very similar.  [0:28:46]  And the collimation doesn't make that much difference. So the collimated beam of a laser,  the coherence, doesn't make that much difference in penetration. As soon as that collimat -  ed coherent beam hits the tissues, all heck breaks loose. Refraction, reflection, reflection  and refraction, everything, it goes everywhere in every which direction. Okay, and so the  same thing's happening with the LED light. It hits that tissue and it's diffusing. And so the  other thing is kind of the marketing versus the evidence. There's a lot of marketing out  there that the near infrared is gonna penetrate really deeply and go inches right through  the tissue. That's not happening, and when you use longer wavelengths, remember we  talked about the medicine, what happens when you use longer wavelengths? It stops af -  fecting cytochrome C oxidase. It moves to water and you start heating the tissues. So  when somebody talks about, well, we're gonna use this longer wavelength to get deeper  into the tissue, but they're putting the wrong medicine in, right? You might get deeper, but  what if you wanna give the patient Advil, and you can deliver it to a certain depth and then  you have something else, like a blood pressure medication, but it goes deeper.  [0:30:04]  Is that what you wanna deliver. So you have to think about what are you actually trying to  achieve? And so when you look at this, the photobiomodulation, even the best with the  lasers, it's gonna only get 10 centimeters into the tissue, a few inches into the tissue at  best. But the effect of that could be very widespread. That penumbra effect, it's gonna  stimulate all those downstream mediators. If something's very shallow, that's the beauty of  like TMJ, where a lot of the dental applications, oral mucosa, or the tooth socket, you're  gonna get a nice penetration into that tissue, even from a topical application, okay. So  we're looking at this coherent, monochromatic, or sometimes they can be polychromatic.  With the LEDs, much more diffuse application. And so I was trying to figure out what the  best analogy would be, and this is kind of what I came up with, and I'll refine this over time.  But if the sponge is tissue, and you're using a laser, it's kind of like injecting it with a nee -  dle. You're gonna have the track, and you're gonna have this really focused effect. And  then you can move it and affect more tissue, but it's gonna have this appearance.  [0:31:15]  09/01/25   Page   of 10   21

SSC 2.0 - 323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  If you're using red LED, it's gonna be like submerging the tissue in the medicine. So it's  much more saturative. And depending on how often you can do it, and how long you can  do it, you can really get a positive effect on those tissues, and affect larger area and a  larger kind of penumbra. So this is that energy deposition. This was a nice picture of how  that looks like. So there is some spread because of the reflection and refraction in the tis -  sues. And with the LEDs, you're getting a much more diffuse broad spectrum spread. And  depending on how much energy density there is, you're gonna have nice penetration of  depth. So the clinical applications in the modern dental practice, I'm gonna talk a little bit  about that, but I just wanna give a brief moment and pause. Are there any questions from  the group on what I've gone over so far?  [0:32:10]  Dr.   Jamison Spencer :   Yeah, there's a bunch. Okay, let me back up here. So...  Dr. Rahul Desai:   Do you wanna moderate, Jamison?  Dr. Jamison Spencer :   Yeah, so one question is, what if he draws the blood, spins it, and  holds the test tube in front of red light? Is that gonna do anything?  Dr. Rahul Desai:   Potentially. There have been studies on cell activation, migration, and  proliferation, because there are also some stem cells. There's also other white blood cells,  and even the platelets that can get activated. So there could be some benefits of photo -  biomodulation with the PRP. There was a company a long time, when I first started, and I  thought it was hocus pocus, so I remember them giving... You'd actually take the PRP and  put it into a device, and it was red light. And I didn't realize the potential power of it. So I  was a little bit close-minded at that time, but sent it back, it was expensive, and didn't think  of it for probably a decade. Yes, there could be benefit from that. There's also benefits of  affecting the tissue. One of them that I've been looking at more closely is macrophage  phenotype. So changing, that's kind of a hot topic in regenerative medicine, is changing  the macrophage from an inflammatory kind of catabolic macrophage, an M1 phenotype, to  M2. And the M2 is much more anabolic, anti-inflammatory, and healing, and reparative.  And so there's a shift, same macrophage, but just shift in its phenotype. So there can be  some changes in the cellular process. So an interesting application, but I think it needs to  be further elucidated.  Dr.   Jamison Spencer :   Yeah, sure.  Dr. Rahul Desai:   Well, what we've been using is stimulating the body before the...  Dr. Jamison Spencer:   Before the draw.  Dr. Rahul Desai:   And that's both affecting potentially your draw if you give it long enough.  And that's why I like it to go home with the patient for a week or two. Their whole body is  09/01/25   Page   of 11   21

SSC 2.0 - 323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  going to be better. So when you're drawing their blood, it's going to have more stem cells  in it. It's going to be more activated, but the system's going to be more activated. So then  when you put it back in wherever, it's going to work. You're going to work with a better sub -  strate.  Dr. Jamison Spencer :   Awesome. This is a good question from David Miller to summa -  rize. If you have a patient that has cancer, is this something you would use or not use?  Dr. Rahul Desai:   Yeah, for cancer, the CYA answer is no. Don't use it with an active can -  cer.  Dr.   Jamison Spencer :   And that goes with PRF, PRP, kind of anything like that. Is that  correct?  Dr. Rahul Desai:   Yeah. With regenerative medicine, it's an unknown. There are studies  that are coming out that are actually showing that photobiomodulation may inhibit cancer  cells, maybe like preferentially apoptosis of the cancer cell, but it's so early and it's specif -  ic. There's so many different types of cancers. They're researching different ones, and  there's one effect might not be the effect on a different type. And so right now it's best  practice to not use it. There are some... I actually had some discussions with physicians  that are using it away from a tumor, so if it's known to be non-metastatic and they still have  other issues, or post-chemotherapy neuropathies or other things that they're suffering  from, that they are using it for that, but just not on top of the tumor. Just like with pregnan -  cy, the different sort of tumor, that don't use it over the womb.  Dr.   Jamison Spencer:   Right on. If you've got the full body panel, about how much time  before bed would be appropriate? So I think she means how much time for the exposure  itself, and then also is there a recommendation? I've been doing mine like right before I go  to bed. Should I do it earlier?  Dr. Rahul Desai:   You can. An hour would probably be a good starting point. You can do...  It depends on how you're doing it, also, that if you're going to say do a therapeutic dose to  your skin, your face, and have that up close and personal, so say you're three to six inches  or a foot away from the device, you're going to get a much more concentrated dose, and  then so maybe do that closer to bedtime. If you're going to do more of the sleep hygiene,  like circadian rhythm path, then 30 minutes, an hour, turn it on and let it bathe the room  and get those red light effects kind of like dusk.  Dr. Jamison Spencer :   Yeah, I like that. That's a cool idea. Raina has a light called the  Lofty. She says it has a red light mode. Would that be similar? I'm not familiar with that  product.  09/01/25   Page   of 12   21

SSC 2.0 - 323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  Dr. Rahul Desai:   It depends. If it's a filter, then no. Because it's just coming through that.  It's like a yellow light or a white light, and then there's a red filter on it, but you're not going  to get those specific wavelengths. It may not have the same effect on those photorecep -  tors. So the light has to be of that specific wavelength to create those changes.  [0:37:40]  Dr.   Jamison Spencer:   Here's an interesting question. So Luke asked, are there any ad -  vantages to an intraoral lollipop style photobiomodulation delivery system for oral cavity  like what they are using at St. Jude's from mucositis?  Dr. Rahul Desai:   Yeah, absolutely. I've seen toothbrushes that have it. I don't know how  long you have to brush your teeth for to get a good dose with that, but if it is for oral mu -  cosa, gum, or intraoral device would be effective and potentially more so depending on  what your treatment is. With either one of these panels, the power density is enough that if  you put it close one to three inches away from your face, TMJ, it's going to affect the tis -  sues. And depending on the patient's age, there's two ways even at St. Jude's of delivering  that energy. So they have an external device and source, and they also have like the, it's  more like a popsicle rather than a lollipop.  Dr.   Jamison Spencer :   Okay, very cool. And then one more, we'll let you continue. If  you're using this with PRF, recommendations for how that would be used? I think I know  your answer to this, and then I'll answer the last part here of the RX code. Are we billing  this for TMJ? No, you're not. Amit, if you got the newsletter this month, that's the how  much do you charge and what's the code question that I love so much. So the good news  about photobiomodulation is it's not covered by anybody right now, right?  Dr. Rahul Desai:   Nope.  Dr.   Jamison Spencer:   Which I think that's good news, frankly.  Dr. Rahul Desai:   Well, for post chemo, oral mucositis...  Dr. Jamison Spencer:   [Overlapping conversation] cancer kids.  Dr. Rahul Desai:   Yeah, but not for what we're talking about tonight.  Dr.   Jamison Spencer :   But if we're doing this for TMJ stuff, what would you recommend  for use of the patient?  Dr. Rahul Desai:   I would say get it to them sooner than later. So if there is a lag, usually  where there is like, you're scheduling a patient for a treatment. When they sign up for it, if  it's a week or two before, have them get the device, either have them available or drop  ship. And the sooner that they can start priming the tissue, the better.  09/01/25   Page   of 13   21

SSC 2.0 - 323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  [0:40:00]  Dr.   Jamison Spencer :   This small unit is so dang perfect for us, for someone, and again,  something that they can take home, and it's pretty heavy. And so I think that's what...  We've had patients actually buy the big units, because we're using the big unit in our of -  fice, but the small unit is just so affordable and great for them to use at home every day,  twice a day. So that's what I'm recommending, and I think you recommend the same thing  right? I mean, that's what you're doing personally as well, right, Rahul?  Dr. Rahul Desai:   Yeah.  Dr.   Jamison Spencer :   You're ..the light twice a day.  Dr. Rahul Desai:   A lot of folks have moved... Once they get the benefits of it and see... I  mean, it's just... Using is believing. So once they step in with the small one, it's not too...  And they're consistent with the use. That's one thing that you have to be. It's not one time  it's gonna fix it. So they're consistent with the use for several weeks. I've seen so many  conversions into the big panel, and then that's... For me too, I have either available, and I  just like the larger dose. I feel a difference in many different parameters.  Dr. Jamison Spencer:   So Raina, we'll get to your question in a bit, because if you don't  know that, that was covered in the last one, but people are basically buying these. I  wouldn't sell them. They're too inexpensive to rent out. I wouldn't have that hassle. So we'll  talk more about that towards the end here.  Dr. Rahul Desai:   Yeah, we tried that.  Dr.   Jamison Spencer :   Yeah, I bet. No, that'd be a hassle. You would not wanna be get -  ting these back. It'd be like people aren't gonna give them back. So go ahead.  Clinical Appliactions of PBM in Modern Dental Practice   [0:41:40]  Dr. Rahul Desai:   So you can look at blue or red, but clinical applications of PBM, I like the  blue one. Looked a little prettier. I was kinda making some slides, and I think I forgot to  delete the next one. But TMJ, arthritis, or facial pains with sleep medicine, appliance ther -  apy, really affecting the cognitive support, circadian balance, and then general dentistry  with surgical healing and pain reduction. I think it really spans the gamut. And the use case  is really, we talked about getting them this at home because of the micro dosing effect is  really important. And then having them use it twice a day. And if they're targeting specific  areas, if they can do that even once a day to that specific area. So if they're coming in for  09/01/25   Page   of 14   21

SSC 2.0 - 323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  TMJ and it's bilateral PRF injections, or if it's unilateral, you can use it systemically. You  can use it on the abdomen, the back face, and then target that specific area where you're  going to treat the disease, where the joint is injured. So if it were me, I'm going to maybe a  knee, maybe a shoulder, but I also want to get that systemic effect. And if they have it in  the room, they could just hit the button and have it run for 20 minutes before bedtime, then  shoot, do that as well.  [0:42:54]  But you don't need to sit in front of the device. Let that just bathe the room. So there's dif -  ferent ways of applying it, but for that kind of backtracking a little bit for that TMJ, I think  getting that, targeting it, starting that support. And then afterwards, I don't know how much  pain there is, but that day, like immediately they can start to use that. It will help with in -  flammation. It'll help with lymphatic movement and it'll help with progressing the healing  and you're going to get faster, better healing and hopefully more durability of that effect.  And that's what we want to show.  How PBM Supports Healing in TMJ Disorders   [0:43:25]  So we'll talk a little bit about the research, how PBM supports TMJ. We talked about anti-  inflammatory effects, enhanced microcirculation, analgesic effects, tissue repair and re -  generation. These are all studies that have demonstrated this in different tissues, in the  musculoskeletal systems. If anybody wants any of these studies, I can send these out. As  Jamison and I have spoken about, you're kind of the pioneers in this field.  [0:43:55]  There are TMJ studies. They have shown benefits. There was a review article I can send  anyone. I think that was done a couple years ago. And there were some mixed results in  there, but I think they were elucidating how to apply it, how much, what's the dosing, all of  those different parameters. So I think we would love to prove this. I think we have really  dialed in the right dosing, the right energy, the right medicine, and we wanna create a, start  data registry and get this information and then publish it. So if there's folks that are inter -  ested in this, we need to do it. And we also wanna track sleep data and anxiety data be -  cause that's a powerful effect as well.  How PBM Supports Sleep Health in Dental Care   [0:44:36]  Looking at sleep, kind of a good segue into that, airway tissue recovery, enhanced oxygen  delivery, circadian rhythm support, neurocognitive mood benefits. There's tons of data  that's pouring out right now on anxiety and depression with red light therapy. And it's really,  we were talking about this kind of optic pathway, also the transcranial delivery and sys -  temic delivery. When you stimulate all those stem cells and those reparative processes,  09/01/25   Page   of 15   21

SSC 2.0 - 323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  some of that's gonna cross the blood-brain barrier and it's gonna affect the central nervous  system.  [0:45:12]  So some of these studies are really powerful. And I think anybody that's in pain or dealing  with disease, that's just part of the process. I don't know one patient that comes and sees  me in the regenerative medicine space that's not dealing with some sort of anxiety or de -  pression related to what they're dealing with. And so if we can help some of that as well  and give them better sleep, give them better support, I think that's a really powerful way of  doing things.  How PBM Supports Brain Health and Cognitive Function   [0:45:41]  And that's kind of this brain and cognitive function. To me, another really cool thing about  this device is not a lot of other things can we give the patient to affect their life forever. I  mean, I feel like we can do that with regenerative medicine because we change the trajec -  tory of their health. That's why it got me so excited. I had my disc injected, which was  killing me. And I injured it in medical school and it just kept getting worse over the years.  And then at 40 something, it was debilitating. And I had stem cells PRP in my low back, in  the disc itself, and it completely changed my life.  [0:46:20]  And we've done it for thousands of patients and I saw that happen, but it changed the tra -  jectory of your life, right? It's not just that we're doing something and we're, especially in  pain management, we put steroids in. And we kick the can down the road and then they  came back and it was just this horrible cycle. We're changing their trajectory. And this is  why I get so excited about this is we're going to do that. Like we're going to give this de -  vice to someone, they're going to heal from their injury or their, dental issues or problems.  And then they don't put it in the closet. They don't hide it away. Like this stays out. This is  for you, it's for your family, and we're going to be able to change that long-term trajectory.  And part of that's neurocognitive decline. We see that it's a huge issue. We're all getting  older. And part of it's, just this brain function. And I see it in, my parents are getting older. I  see it in other family members, a lot of friends now we're getting to that age that we were  seeing this in our communities. And it's something that's really important to me. And I think  it's really amazing that we can affect that sort of change with such a simple intervention.  [0:47:22]  And so when we start early, it's going to affect... There are a lot of other, again, I've been  the pseudo master's degree, just looking at what it's doing with the brain waste removal  system. So it is a powerful enhancer of that. So getting rid of at night, when we sleep, we  remove all of these like beta amyloid proteins and all of these other waste products of the  brain. And part of that's this glymphatic and lymphatic systems. And this is stimulating that.  This is actually getting this to work better. And it's such a benign way of doing it. And so  09/01/25   Page   of 16   21

SSC 2.0 - 323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  there's more and more data that's going to demonstrate this enhanced mitochondrial func -  tion, reducing inflammation, improved cerebral blood flow and stimulation of neuroplastici -  ty. And some of these are older ones. There's some newer articles that are coming out that  are totally fascinating. And it doesn't take transcranial. This is like stimulating the body that  allows for this improvement.  How PBM Supports Healing in General Dentistry   [0:48:19]  General dentistry with... I've been totally blessed to have just had to have teeth cleanings  in the dentist. So I do not have personal experience.   I have crappy tendons and ligaments,  as you've seen on the MRIs, I have really good teeth, And so I've never had a cavity. I've  never had any dental surgeries, but in that space, obviously post-surgical healing, pain  and swelling reduction, anti-inflammatory effects, soft tissue regeneration. And again, this  can be percutaneous. It doesn't have to be intraoral. Could intraoral, like the more direct  you get to something, would it potentially be better? It's just a little bit more cumbersome.  And if you can use this device, plus leverage it for all the other things that we're talking  about, it's just, there's some beauty in the simplicity.  Choosing the Right PBM Partner   [0:49:03]  So next is why RedVive? Choosing the right partner. Not all devices and not all companies  are created equally. And we are really excited about the team that we've put together. It's  been some divine providence, I believe, in getting this group together and bringing togeth -  er folks that really believe in what they're doing and affecting a change. And so why Red -  Vive? It's by physicians, for physicians, for clinicians. And it's really built with clinical out -  comes in mind, not gimmicks. We want to keep things relatively simple and cost-effective.  We're using only the most precise wavelengths. We've seen some devices, they're getting  8, 9,10 different wavelengths.  [0:49:47]  What are they trying to achieve? What is their actual... Why are you using so many medi -  cines? And do they actually know what it's doing? We talked about it. If you start to get  anything over 850, now you're going to start targeting water. You start heating. And that  could be good for reducing, you know, improving some blood flow and other dynamics, but  it's not targeted. The right dose, the right delivery, using an optimized radiance for both the  soft tissues, superficial and deep, proven clinical protocols. We're continually studying and  applying these and doing research now. Training and support. Hopefully, a lot of the folks  that have been integrated have felt that support with Mike and Jay Dave. There's a lot of  integration calls and a lot of client support. We want to support the patients. We also want  to support the teams that are supporting the docs here. And finally, RedVive University.  09/01/25   Page   of 17   21

SSC 2.0 - 323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  That's getting fuller and fuller. We want to really leverage that over time. And there's some  great resources. And Jamison has also, and with some of his connections, offered to help  me find some of these articles that are more challenging to get.  Right Wavelength = Right Medicine   [0:50:59]  So the right medicine, and I love ChatGPT. It's my favorite. And so he created this awe -  some design. And so it is the medicine. So what is this? We do not sell medicine, and Mike  was worried about somebody ordering this. So they do not come in droplets, but this is the  medicine. So these wavelengths, so the 635, 670, 810, 850, you can memorize that.  That's the medicine that we're going to be delivering to the patients, and that's what makes  it so effective. And then the dose. We talked about the power. That's the device. How far  you're away from it, and the time. And these, the distance and the time, that's going to be  controllable by the patient. And that's where the protocols come in. Now, the beauty of  photobiomodulation is it's very safe, okay? There's a large therapeutic window. Anywhere  from 5 minutes to 30 minutes or so, you're going to be pretty safe in getting a good amount  of energy to the tissue and affecting a positive change. And there is a, it's called the Arndt-  Schultz curve. So too low of a dose, there's insufficient stimulation. You're not going to get  enough change. Optimal dose, we're talking about that 5 minutes to 30 minutes, big win -  dow. You have to play with that.  The Right Dose   [0:52:11]  And everybody's a little bit different and every indication is a little bit different. We can talk  to that about that. We've made some general guidelines. And then too high of dose, there  will be some inhibition. You'll get cellular heating, you'll get some non-beneficial effects.  And so there could be too much. You'll have fatigue, you'll have redness, you have indura -  tion into the tissue or erythema. And so this was a really nice... This study demonstrated it  beautifully in these curves. So this is kind of the cellular response. So you get a dose, you  have this cell response, and you can usually get another dose between 24 and 48 hours.  And so when we're talking about a specific tissue area, so you have TMJ and you're going  to deliver this energy, and they're going to do, 5 to 10 minutes local to that tissue. You  need 24 to 48 hours for that tissue to recover. Okay, so you don't let... We talked about  morning and night, don't go back and do it in the same place. Why is that you're going to  get into this inhibition range. Can you see this? So you stimulate, it's coming down, you  stimulate it again, and you get this stacking effect, and suddenly it'll become inhibitory, and  we don't want to go here.  [0:53:16]  09/01/25   Page   of 18   21

SSC 2.0 - 323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  And so at that time, you might get actually some increased stiffness, increased pain, in -  creased swelling in that area, and just general fatigue. So overstimulation, so that can  happen. So we need the body, you're stimulating, you're producing, you're modulating the  biologic system, and then you need it to respond and react and rest. Okay, does that make  sense to everybody? Hopefully.  Healing From Your Chair to their Couch   [0:53:38]  Healing from your chair to your couch. So this is what we've seen with our practice. We're  able to leverage it in office, and then this device, and these devices are beautiful that you  can take it home and leverage it in home care and microdose it, and there's a continuum.  You're basically expanding the walls of the clinic. And RedVive was really built for the clin -  ic. This was built for our practice, and I wanted to go through this. When I was ap -  proached, I've been using photobiomodulation for probably eight, nine years, but not  through RedVive. I've been leveraging it. I've probably sold 500 to 1,000 units just for  somebody else before I started working with RedVive, either sending them to websites, a  lot of places, like I thought the beds were super cool, and was sending folks to get mem -  berships at different clinics around the Portland area or regionally or wherever they were to  get this.  The Right Medicine   [0:54:37]  So when I was approached by Mike and Matt, partner and Jared,   we talked about it and  said, we need the right medicine. If we're going to do something, if we're going to bring this  in-house, like why? We want to affect a positive change for our patients. We want better. I  want to do it for better outcomes. We have shockwave. We have EMTT. We have PEMF. I  love toys. I'm a radiologist. If something's going to potentially help our patients, let's get it,  and if it doesn't break the bank. And I wanted to get a $150,000 red light bed, and it just  wasn't in the economics at that time. So we talked about the right medicine. So we did a  deep dive. We talked about why this is the right medicine, those wavelengths. We want to  provide a really commercial-grade device, and so that was the first thing.  Streamlined Integrated Process   [0:55:23]  Number two was a streamlined and integrated process, and we developed this through the  clinic. So we had this device. We finally got it.   This is an awesome device. I took it home. I  used it. My whole family was in love with it, and then we started giving it to patients. I'm  like, it's expensive. I don't think people are going to buy it, and I'd never had that. Like I  09/01/25   Page   of 19   21

SSC 2.0 - 323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  wasn't a retail practice. We had the devices were in-house. So this was at first like, hey,  this is kind of a spendier item. You're going to take it home, and I thought, okay, we're go -  ing to rent it. That was a question today. So we're going to start with renting. It's like 99  bucks a month to take it home, or we build it into the price of it, and we started that, and  people took it home, and people started having great responses, and nobody gave it back.  So we live in a few months, and we're like, okay, nobody's giving it back. We have to hire  this guy to drop it off, and then we had this whole infrastructure to kind of pick it up, and  nobody was using it. We said, okay, this device is like, we knew it was working well, but  people love it. So we developed a streamlined, integrated process, and we started basical -  ly prescribing it. So when somebody did a PRP, I gave them a small panel.  [0:56:24]  When somebody did a stem cell procedure, I believed in it, I gave them a big panel. That  was just part of the deal. That was a built-in prescribed model. There were patients that  came for follow-up that I'd done a long time ago, and they were doing well. We did out to a  year follow-up for our regenerative cases, so they had to come and see me and say, I'm  doing great, I got some other issues, and we were talking to other patients that were re -  covering, but they wanted a boost, or an issue that really didn't need regenerative medi -  cine. And I would talk to them about it, and so we had another pathway where I would just  talk to my MA, I had a scribe, talk to the scribe, say, can you tell this, I talked to them a lit -  tle bit about photobiomodulation, gave them my elevator speech, and then passed that in -  formation on to my scribe, and she would call Mike or Matt, and they would call the patient.  And so we created these processes inside the office, and they worked really well. And why  did I want that?  Happy Supported Patients and Staff   [0:57:18]  I wanted happy, supported patients. We wanted awesome outcomes, super happy pa -  tients, cutting-edge technology. I always like the newest things that are going to be work -  ing, and use it on myself and see if it's helpful. And supported staff. We were busy, like a  super busy practice, didn't want to overload our patients, overload our staff, and they were  busy enough, I didn't want them having to sell something, returns, all those other things. I  didn't want that. So I said, how do you build a system that can do that? If you can do that,  then yeah, I'm totally interested in working with this company and helping build it.  No Inventory   [0:57:54]  And the other thing is I didn't want inventory. I did not want, we have no storage, every -  body's fighting for every closet at the practice, and so it's like no inventory. I didn't want to  buy it. I didn't want to lay out a bunch of money to buy stuff and feel obligated to sell it. And  09/01/25   Page   of 20   21

SSC 2.0 - 323: Photobiomodulation Part 2  I wanted to talk about it. I believed in it. And if they wanted it, someone else deliver it, deal  with it. And Mike built that system. Amazing tech stack, just really, refine this, we have a  beautiful fulfillment center, we are lucky outside of Portland.  Financial Upside   [0:58:27]  And I wanted some financial upside. We wanted the clinic to do well. We all do. And we  wanted to do this ethically and bring this high value product to the patients, but also not  just send them off somewhere and not have control of that. And that goes back to the right  medicine. So we actually built this company for the clinic. And then we realized, wow, we  can potentially take this to others and improve the lives of their patients and improve the  lives of the docs and the practices.  [Go to your Webinar Archives to Continue Watching (April 2025)]  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 21   21

