SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  SSC 2.0   Level 1  116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  [intro music]  Appliance Selection Simplified   [0:00:12]  Now here is a appliance selection simplified. If you go through that whole chart you will  find this. But with lateral bruxer's and limited retention, those are going to be the. The big  initial failures is using the wrong appliance and someone has evidence of lateral bruxism  using the wrong appliance who Someone has poor retention. So the good choices for a  lateral bruxer would be your push style, your anterior pull push and your pull. Because  people can move their jaw side to side with these appliances in general very, very well.  Those are good choices. Your best choices for those with limited retention are, are your  push style appliances and the interlocking style appliances. Now if you're paying attention,  you notice the herp style appliance. Get my pointer on the screen here, here and here. So  that could be your one quiver, couldn't it? Except for what? Metal. And except for the fact  that it's a little harder for your team to adjust. It's a little harder to for patients to figure out  how to adjust. Happens to be the one covered by Medicare. But it's definitely not the easi -  est for older people to use. So there is no one best appliance. The one best appliance is  the one that the patient will actually use.  Combination Therapy   [0:01:34]  What about combination therapy? What about using oral appliance therapy in conjunction  with CPAP? Well, this can be a great idea as I talk more about marketing your practice.  And in level two and level four, you know, level four being kind of the main focus of that.  But in level two, talking about screening your patients and referring them and things like  that. One of the comments I'll make is that when I introduce myself to a new sleep doctor  or even, you know, primary care doctors, when I'm kind of feeling out what their perspec -  tive is, I will ask a sleep doctor, hey, do you ever have patients that can't tolerate CPAP  very well? And they'll say, well you know, we do have some. And just heads up, they will  typically say in my experience, about 90% of their patients actually use their CPAP. The  literature suggests that it's more like 50% actually use their CPAP. But they'll say that. And  I'll say, hey, that's awesome. You guys must do a great job with fitting CPAP and stuff like  that. And I know that those numbers can be true because the main sleep doctor we work  with in Boise, his patients, literally 80 to 90% of them use their CPAP.  09/01/25   Page   of 1   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  [0:02:44]  And that's because they do a great job with follow up and stuff like that. Nevertheless,  even with Numbers like that, even if they say, yeah, 80 to 90% use it, well, what happens  with that? 10 to 20%? Why? Why do they have a problem? And usually they'll say, well,  you know, sometimes it's mask leak, it's the pressure that gets to them, stuff like that. And  I'll say, so do you think it might be possible that if we did an oral appliance in conjunction  with their CPAP and we could help more of your patients use their CPAP? And that's al -  ways my first approach to building a relationship with that sleep doctor is I can help more  of your patients use their CPAP. Now, the things on the slide here are things that I've made  over the years to help people use oral appliance therapy in conjunction with CPAP. How -  ever, I do not, I strongly actually recommend you do not do any of these things anymore.  This is not necessary. These things are a hassle. We were playing around with this stuff,  and a lot of, you know, inventor type of zeal went into these things, and it was kind of fun.  [0:03:49]  And a lot of them did work. All of these things you see on the screen here are things that I  made for my patients. Like this thing up here, that's a valve that I put on a CPAP mask that  the bottom there, the thing that's in his mouth that was called the Oracle appliance, doesn't  exist anymore. And that was designed to have CPAP put through the mouth. Terrible idea.  Everyone hated it. But they had these masks. And so I would convert it to be basically a  mouth plug. I called it the anti blowby appliance. And so you could put that in their mouth,  and there is no way that they could blow air out of their mouth  [0:04:29]  And this guy, he liked the ability to breathe in. And so I put a valve on it that allowed him to  breathe in through his mouth if he felt like he needed to, but he couldn't blow out through  his mouth. This thing down here, we use that same type of mask, connected it with a  mandibular advancement device and connected it to nasal pillows. Here's just nasal pil -  lows. Here's a custom mask that I made by taking an impression of the patient's face. And  to my knowledge, this was made probably 15 years ago or so. And I'm pretty sure that at  least one of the patients that I made a mask like that for still uses it. It's had to be kind of  relined multiple times as his face has changed over time. So bottom line, though, that may  sound exciting to you. To do stuff like that. Trust me, it's not as exciting as you might think.  I didn't get paid any, a dime more for any of these. So what we eventually figured out to do  is the best combination therapy is whatever oral appliance is best for the patient combined  with whatever mask they like.  The Best Combination Therapy?   [0:05:34]  The beauty of this model is their mask will be replaced by insurance every three to six  months. It's not connected to the oral appliance. So they can just change out masks as  they need to. They can try different masks. The oral appliance will be covered by their in -  09/01/25   Page   of 2   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  surance every two to five years, depending on the insurance, depending on your model.  But they won't be connected in a way to though it'll put extra pressure on their teeth. I don't  like anchoring to the maxilla, a mask and straps and putting all these weird pressures on  their teeth. So do it this way with combination therapy. Combination therapy is important.  Combination therapy is particularly important with you building a relationship with the doc -  tors that you want to work with.  Myofunctional Therapy   [0:06:14]  Now, what about myofunctional therapy? And how does myofunctional therapy play a role  in the things we do? And I know some of you are kind of excited about myofunctional ther -  apy. The myofunctional therapists have, you know, targeted dentists and hygienists and  stuff like that. And so here's my take and I'll kind of put this in layers. So layer one is, I  think myofunctional therapy is really, really important.  [0:06:40]  So make sure that you understand that's my foundation. Because you're going to think  that. I don't think it's important here in just a second. But this study that is now on this slide  was done by Dr. Camacho, who's a sleep doctor in the army. This guy does meta analysis  like you and I would, you know, eat breakfast or something. So these just turns these out  all the time. And the story behind this, which I believe to be true, but I've not firsthand got  acknowledgement on this with one of the authors. But the, if you kind of look at the au -  thors, we got Dr. Zaghi on here as an ENT, and, and so we've got kind of a mixed bag of  authors on here that maybe, or maybe didn't necessarily think a lot about myofunctional  therapy. So I am told that the authors of this meta analysis went into looking at this, not  necessarily pro myofunctional therapy, but kind of looking at more like, does this really  work. And what they found in their meta analysis was that according to the literature that's  been published anyway, because that's what a meta analysis is, is looking at the literature  as a whole, is that there was a massive improvement of the apnea popnea index using just  myofunctional therapy.  [0:08:03]  So as you see here, the myofunctional therapy decreases apnea apopnea index by 50% in  adults, 62% in kiddos. That's pretty freaking amazing. So as it says, you know, myofunc -  tional therapy could serve as an adjunct. Other obstructive sleep apnea treatments, you  betcha. Why wouldn't you use myofunctional therapy if you are doing oral appliance thera -  py with your patient? The analogy I use with this is as we get older, we tend to get floppier.  And if you are an older person yourself, if you're over 30 or 40 years old, you know that  you have to work out kind of extra hard to maintain the level of floppiness that you've ac -  quired at that point in your life. So what exercises do you do for your airway? Yeah, you do  push ups, you do, you know, curls, you do squats. You do all this stuff for your other mus -  cles. What do you do for your airway? Well, probably nothing, right? And when you kind of  09/01/25   Page   of 3   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  put that in perspective, you're like, well, that kind of makes sense. And when people do  this, they can actually see a difference here. They can see a difference in their throat. They  can see differences and then feel different.  [0:09:12]  So we give our patients exercises. I'll talk more about this in level 2, but just in a nutshell,  there's a program called Snore Gym or an app called Snore Gym. So same company that  created Snore Lab. And that's great. That is a paid thing that takes them through different  exercises. Audrey Yoon, who's a pediatric pediatrician, excuse me, pediatric dentist and  orthodontist, who's done a lot of research in this space with kiddos in particular, she has  free videos online that you can access. And then there, of course, there are myofunctional  therapists, people that are trained in this. Now, on that point, if you're a dentist watching  this, be a little careful because now again, there's going to be someone that's going to  watch this who's a hygienist. And I'm about to offend you. So I apologize in advance for  this, but this is how I feel about this. There are many hygienists that I've come across that  will kind of go down this path and they'll be like, yeah, this is awesome. This is what I'm  doing. And I don't blame them for that at all. Because if I was cleaning people's teeth for a  living, I would also frankly be looking for something else to do because that would be pret -  ty monotonous and kind of lame after a while.  [0:10:30]  And myofunctional therapy is massively helping people and particularly kiddos, and that is  a much better mission and calling and excitement than I would think cleaning teeth would  be. So I don't blame a hygienist at all for wanting to be in this field. And however, as I just  mentioned a second ago, I don't think you need that really. You know, is there a role for me  to go to the gym and work with a trainer to learn how to do exercises correctly so I don't  hurt myself? You bet. Do I need to keep going to that person forever? Probably not. You  know, at a certain point I've had coaches in my life with various things and at a certain  point, you know, you and the coach tend to agree. It's like, hey, you got it. You know, you  understand what to do now. Now you're on your own. So I think what I tell people now is  you try the free stuff and then if the person needs that one on one help, that's where my -  ofunctional therapists come in. If you're a dentist. I don't know that I would be excited  about getting my hygienist involved in this because I would rather have that hygienist do -  ing hygiene and then having my patients do the exercises on their own.  [0:11:40]  And then if there's someone else in town maybe who focuses on myofunctional therapy  and they may be a speech pathologist, something like that, then I would refer there. Unfor -  tunately, it's kind of expensive. I remember giving a talk somewhere local actually, and af -  ter my presentation, a woman came up to me and she said, hey, I'm a hygienist, but I'm  training myofunctional therapy. You know, I'd love to work with your patients and stuff like  that. And I'm like, well, just curious, how much do you charge? And she's like, yeah, it's  250 bucks an hour. And I was like, ouch. Right? So that's expensive. And if your patient  needed to go many, many times, you know that patient's going to spend a couple thou -  sand dollars like that fast. Having that one on one connection. Now, could that be well  09/01/25   Page   of 4   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  worth it? You betcha. But it would be nice if at $0, that person could get those exercises as  long as mom or dad are motivated to help the kid go through the exercises, doing them  with them, stuff like that. Okay, so pro myofunctional therapy. Not necessarily pro it being  done in your office. Okay. It takes a lot of time. We have multiple appointments. You could  do it. If you want to do it, go for it. We don't do it. Okay, so we use the resources that I al -  ready mentioned.  “Jaw Pain” - Rule of Thumb   [0:13:00]  All right, now let's segue into avoiding possible side effects. And we're going to talk about  jaw pain, tooth movement and bite changes, those being the biggest ones. Now, with jaw  pain, the note that. I've got it here in quotes, because if a patient says my jaw hurts, then  we don't really know what that means. And I'll have dentists all the time. Hey, Jamison, I've  got a patient. They have jaw pain. Okay. I don't know what that means. So first of all, we  need to narrow down what do you mean by jaw pain? So have the patient pointed with one  finger to where it hurts. Now, in general, it's going to be either jaw, joint, or muscle. And if  it's muscle, it's usually masseter versus temporalis. But that's in a nutshell. Or in general,  joint or masseter more so than temporalis. So here's our rules of thumb when it comes to  jaw pain. If the patient has muscle pain, consider reducing the vertical or add posterior  support if there wasn't any.  [0:14:04]  So the first one is, is it too tall? And a question I'll ask again. We'll go over this in more de -  tail in level two of how you change vertical and stuff like that. But for right now, as kind of  the foundation here, a question you can ask the patient is, does the appliance feel like it's  too tall or too small? Okay, remember, whenever we're in diagnosis mode, we're trying not  to lead the witness. Too tall or too small. And most patients would be like, yeah, it seems  like it's too high. Too tall. Okay, great. Let's see if we can make it lower. Once in a blue  moon, you'll have somebody, it's like, yeah, I don't think it's tall enough. I think I need, you  know, it needs to be taller, higher. Okay? And then you can help that patient with that. If  they, if they have a pull, push appliance, a tap appliance, and it didn't have posterior sup -  port, so called in the already then you could add that. The idea behind the pull push appli -  ance is that it's hitting in the front on purpose. Dr. Thornton is a prosthodontist, and so he  was using this kind of NTI effect or Lucia jig, anterior jig effect to reduce some of that mus -  cle contraction, was the theory there.  [0:15:10]  In my experience, people that start having muscle pain it's actually because they are trying  to clench their teeth, they can only hit in the front. That's ticking off their muscles in some  way, they're actually having to work harder than they normally would. You put the posterior  support there and miraculously they feel better. Okay, so posterior support if there wasn't  any before, or reduce the vertical if there's muscle pain, if there's joint pain, think about  09/01/25   Page   of 5   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  protrusion. And most importantly, look at it being asymmetrical. So they've, they may be  with an old style. Well, old style, there's a lot of herps that have the, the weird adjustment  where it's down on one side and up on the other side. And there's some dorsal fin appli -  ances, same way. They're usually well marked, but that still can be confusing for a patient.  So it's possible that the patient goes down on both sides to turn the mechanism, which  means they go forward on one side and backwards on the other side. And that tends to be.  What I see when people have unilateral joint pain is that they've done something weird  with the protrusion. And this might surprise you, but usually the pain is on the side that is  less protruded, which we'll get to here in just a second.  [0:16:21]  So let's say here's a patient and she says, my jaw hurts. And we're like, well, where does it  hurt? She points to her right jaw joint and let's say that we're treating her with a pull style  appliance. What would you say we should do? Should we take her jaw backwards?  Should we put on longer bands, let her jaw go backwards, or should we put on shorter  bands and bring her jaw farther forward? So again, the case here is jaw pain. Right sided  joint pain using a pull appliance forward or backwards? Now you are either saying one of  those and you could tell me why you think forwards or backwards or, usually what I find  when I do this in a live lecture that you may have experienced is that a big part of the  crowd will be kind of like, well, I don't know, you know, I need more information. And then  what's interesting to me is dentists. I just did this yesterday, teaching at a course in Ari -  zona. The dentist will ask all sorts of questions about the appliance, maybe sleeping pos -  ture, is it hitting harder on one side or another, stuff like that. You know, occlusion, is it  class, is she class two, class one, stuff like that.  [0:17:32]  And then sometimes there will be someone who finally asked the right questions. Which  are, tell me about her snoring. Is she still snoring? Tell me how she's feeling. Is she still  sleepy? And those are the questions. Because if I tell you, yeah, her joint's hurting and  she's still snoring and she's still feeling sleepy, then what are you gonna do? Forward,  right? Yeah, we're gonna go farther forward. Now, if you take your bite registration way I  teach, which is comfortably protruded, you're pretty much never gonna have a patient you  go back on. You're only gonna be taking them forward. So those are the questions you're  gonna want to ask. And I know you're gonna be a little nervous about this because you're  thinking, oh, my gosh, I'm taking someone forward. That's gonna hurt their jaw joints or  that's going to affect their lateral pterygoid somehow. You know, all these myths, frankly,  that are swimming around in your head that I hear all the time from people. Just. Just  again, yesterday, teaching this course in Arizona, someone's like, well, you know, when  you bring their jaw forward like that, isn't that going to increase the arthritic breakdown?  And I'm like, explain to me how that would possibly happen, right? This is taking their joint  away from all of the stuff that is going to cause that arthritic breakdown. So, no, it won't. So  you gotta trust me on this. And after you get a few, you know, reps under your belt, you will  know this.  09/01/25   Page   of 6   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  Non-Intuitive Exception to the Rule of Thumb   [0:18:56]  But here is the non, or here are the non intuitive exceptions to the rule of thumb. If the pa -  tient's airway is not being kept patent by the oral appliance, they may fight the appliance in  order to maintain a patent airway. So if you believe the idea that some people will clench  and grind their teeth or posture their jaw without even tooth contact to try to protect their  airway so they don't die, then you should also believe that when we stuff plastic in their  mouth, that that doesn't always make their airway patent. And therefore, there will be some  people that will fight the appliance. Okay, we don't know that the appliance Works immedi -  ately. We learn from their feedback if it's working or not. So our initial position may not be  completely effective and therefore some people might fight the appliance.  [0:19:44]  So the questions you're going to ask, how's the snoring? How are you sleeping? And if  they're like, well, snoring's gone, you know, my bed partner says I'm not snoring anymore.  And man, I feel like a million bucks as far as my sleep goes. And you know, I'm using my  Garmin watch and it says I'm sleeping awesome and everything else but dang, does my  jaw hurt? Okay, that's probably someone that you took too far forward to start. Okay, you  did old school like 70 or 80% max protrusion with your bite registration. And you know, you  may have just joined Spencer Study Club and that's how you're taught to do it. So you're  doing that and you will have people that have joint pain because they actually are too far  protruded. And it's the reason for that is probably stretching the joint capsule or things like  that that you would not have happen if you started in a comfortably protruded position. If  you start comfortably protruded, you're never going to be too far forward. Okay. You'll be  either just right and you didn't have to go forward, which happens a ton, or you'll be going  farther forward.  [0:20:48]  Okay. So if they are still snoring, not sleeping well, then we're going to full steam ahead.  We're going to go farther forward. Now if you're nervous about this the first couple times  you do it, you'll get over this nervousness really quick because you'll realize this is how this  works. I've taught this principle to easily, I don't know, two, 3,000 dentists at this point,  maybe 5,000 dentists. I have yet to have anyone ever email me like, hey Jamison, I did  that non intuitive exception to the rules of thumb thing. Brought the jaw forward on the pa -  tient who was still snoring and sleepy and oh my gosh, I made her jaw 10 times worse.  That's never happened. You would think it would happen. Okay, I'm pretty open with peo -  ple again. If you've taken a course with me or something, you know, I'm, oh, I give you my  email, I give you my cell phone number. I hope I don't give off some sort of air of like, you  better not call me or you know, I'm gonna come down on you hard like ton of bricks if you  get something wrong.  [0:21:47]  09/01/25   Page   of 7   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  Or I try to be pretty approachable. Therefore, I would certainly hope if anybody had had  that experience, that they would let me know. Has never happened. Okay. Not to say it  won't happen, but it hasn't happened yet. But if you, if this is the first time you've ever done  this and you're nervous about it, this is how you do it. You say, hey, we're going to try this  thing. By the way, the patient won't be nervous at all. The patient, that'll be like, well, that  totally makes sense. Yeah, I think you're probably right. I'm not far enough forward yet. You  say, set your alarm for 3 in the morning. Wake up at 3 in the morning take stock of your  jaw. Hey, how's it feel? Feeling good? Okay, cool. Go back to sleep. If you're like, oh,  ouch, take the appliance out, call me the next day, and we'll go from there. Okay. Now re -  member, though, snoring can be nasal. So in your questions about snoring and how are  you feeling, let's say they go, well, the snoring is not completely gone. I'm feeling awe -  some, though. Okay, then you might need to follow up with a question of, let's ask a little  bit more about your snoring.  [0:22:47]  Hopefully you would have asked this already. But the questions to ask on snoring are, is  your snoring positional or said a more direct way. Do you snore more on your back, side,  stomach? You know, are you the kind of person that you're on your back and your wife  gives you the elbow and says, hey, roll over. And you roll over, and then the snoring is bet -  ter? Okay, that's back to the throat snoring. Okay. On the other hand, if they're like, no, you  know, I kind of snore in all positions. And then my favorite question on that is curious, do  you snore sitting up on a plane? And they're like, yeah, you know, I kind of snore any -  where. Nose. Okay, that's their nose. So in that case, you're not sure about the snoring. So  if they, if the snoring was nasal snoring, but they feel really good, then this may not have  anything to do with jaw position. If it's nasal snoring and they're not feeling well rested, I  would still go farther forward and see what happens. But if it's nasal snoring, then you get  them to an ENT, they're going to help, you know, with their, with their nasal airway.  [0:23:50]  And that could make a huge difference. Okay, so that is our non intuitive exceptions to the  rules of thumb. Not to be, you know, cocky or something on this. Like, I came up with this a  long time ago. This is kind of a TMJ guy approach to dental sleep medicine. I remember  when I... So if you read the American Academy of Dental Sleep Medicine has guidelines  for dealing with side effects and you'll see a line in there that says, because I was part of  the group that put those together and there's a line that says basically in rare exceptions,  in rare instances there may be a patient that further protrusion is indicated to relieve their  joint pain. And that line was put in there because of me, because I taught this huge group.  Well, it wasn't huge, but like 10 other dentists and a couple MDs on that panel that this  happens. And all of them were kind of like, what are you talking about, man? And then  each of them, or most of them anyway, not all of them, but several of them reached out to  me after teaching them that principle and going like, oh my gosh, Jamison, this has come  up now, you know, a few times. And every time I ask them, how's the snoring? How are  you sleeping? If they're still snoring and they're sleeping poorly, I bring their jaw farther  forward and their jaw pain gets better, they're snoring and their sleep gets better. Okay, so  09/01/25   Page   of 8   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  you can just jump straight to that. Whereas a lot of kind of the experts in dental sleep med -  icine that didn't have the TMJ background very perplexed on this issue.  Predict the Problems BEFORE they Occur   [0:25:20]  Now let's predict the problems before they occur. It's much easier to, you know, an ounce  of prevention's worth a pound of cure. That's for darn sure. So here I'm going to talk about  how to avoid side effects then later in Level 2, I'll talk to you about how to deal with these  side effects if they do occur. But let's get you started on a foundation of we don't have to  have them in the first place.  [video playback]  All right, so we've spent plenty of time on this slide before you can go back in the previous  sessions in level one and all about the jaw joints and reducing displacement, non reducing  displacement, all this stuff. Okay? So for right now, just remind you what a reducing disc  displacement is where it's popping and clicking, popping into place when the patient  opens. Non reducing, that disc is out of place all the time.  Avoiding Problems   [0:26:11]  [video playback]  So here's what we're looking for. A person with a reducing disc displacement, we are going  to hold their jaw right about here with your appliance. With a non reducing displacement,  we hold it right about there with an oral appliance. So this person with the reducing disc  displacement prior to them using the oral appliance for their sleep, how much time do you  think they spent on the disc during a 24 hour period? Okay, so think about this. They're  only on the disc when they open and it pops into place. When their teeth are together, the  they are off the disc. There's no room for the disc to be in place. So when they're most of  their chewing, they're off the disc. They might yawn and go on the disc. They might open  and pop on the disc. Some people might kind of pop onto the disc and naturally hold their  jaw and spend actually quite a bit of time on the disc. But you're not going to know that. So  in general though, it's not going to be eight hours a day. Okay?  [0:27:13]  Let's agree on that. For most patients with a reducing displacement, they're going to be off  the disc a lot more than they are on the disc. And now you, by holding their jaw on the disc  all night long, they're going to go from off most of the time to now on a lot of the time.  Okay, a lot more than they have in the past. The person with a non reducing displacement,  same thing. But you're holding the jaw kind of at a different pressure point and you're dis -  tracting the condyle a little bit. You're holding it forward and down a little bit. Okay, so what  could happen here? Well, the person with a reducing displacement, their brain may de -  cide, you know what, I kind of like it. Kind of like being in this non dislocated state. I think  09/01/25   Page   of 9   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  we'll stay here. What would that mean? So that would mean they would develop a posteri -  or open bite. Right? Because the person right here, their teeth are not touching. This is the  correct joint position. Remember this is CR for them. But their teeth don't touch. Now this  person here, they're still off the disc. But what might happen and what I've seen happen in  a few cases is they start clicking again.  [0:28:28]  Okay. That non reducing displacement becomes reducing. Pop, pop, pop, pop. Now so far  I've never had a patient super stoked about that. I've never had a patient like oh my gosh,  it's a miracle. I've been a non reducing displacement, I think for 20 years. Now it's back to  reducing. How cool is that, Dr. Spencer? Never has that happened because their percep -  tion is, hey, it hasn't popped for years. Now it's popping. This is why we educate our pa -  tients in advance. This is why you get yourself a TMJ demonstrator from Great Lakes Or -  thodontics. Use that thing on every one of these patients to educate them on what's going  on. But this is some of the problems that could occur. So the person with the reducing dis -  placement, you need to teach them that they have to dislocate their jaw to get their teeth  to touch in the morning. Okay? And be real clear on what that means for them.  [0:29:19]  Now, oral appliances for snoring and sleep apnea collagen make TMJ problems worse.  Right? I mean that's like clear, right? And just yesterday I was in a course and someone  literally asked this question. Well, no, not at all. Quite to the contrary.   So this is a meta  analysis. Again, multiple studies looked at and Jeff Okeson, one of the authors on here,  I'm sure you know what they showed here is that meta regression analysis showed the pa -  tients with pre existing signs and symptoms of TMD do not experience significant exacer -  bation of symptoms using the MAD. Presence of TMD does not appear to be routine con -  traindication for the use of MAD used for the management of OSA. I wish that the FDA  would change their rules because if you look at the inserts for every oral appliance, it will  say that a patient can't be treated with oral appliance therapy if they have a TMJ problem.  And this is why I told you on the screening aspects and the documentation that you need  to note that the person does not have an active TMJ problem. Otherwise the insurance  company could look for that one line that says they have a TMJ problem and deny care for  that patient. That is has never been based on any science or evidence. It was just based  on, you know, the whim of whoever put that stuff together at the FDA originally and proba -  bly how they had been taught incorrectly in dental school, as most of us were.  [0:30:42]  Well, I shouldn't say it that way. We just got so little education. It's not that we were taught  incorrectly necessarily, it's just that we weren't taught at all. So don't be scared of oral ap -  pliance therapy in someone with existing or pre existing TMJ problems. Okay, now let's get  down to some of these things. We got tooth movement. The most common area of tooth  movement is first and second molar on the bottom with the teeth being pulled away be -  cause we didn't wrap the distal of the second molar. The thing I want you to have your pa -  tients do here is world's greatest flosser. So we want them to floss their teeth every night.  Okay? You've been telling your patients, do this for years, and they should note how it  09/01/25   Page   of 10   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  feels. Snap, snap, snap, snap, snap. Everything's cool. If all of a sudden it's like, slide,  slide, slide, then they call you up and say, hey, I swear it used to go snap, snap. Now it's  going slide, slide. Can I come in and get that checked out? This is another indicator for  you, though. So remember in my practices, our dental exam is, when did you see your  dentist last for you?  [0:31:41]  You might want to do a very thorough evaluation, you know, with flossing between the  teeth. And there's a light contact between those teeth or no contact between those teeth.  So that, you know, was it the appliance or did it already. Did they already have light con -  tacts or no contacts between those teeth? This wrapping the distal of the most distal tooth  on the bottom is sometimes easier said than done. So if there's no soft tissue there, if  there's a space like there is on these models here, then it's easy. But the labs won't always  do it. Why won't they do it? Because it makes it harder to seat the appliance. Okay? The  line of draw is harder. And rather than have the dentist send back the appliance to be re -  made by the lab, they'll just cut that off and trim it off, like, halfway onto the occlusal sur -  face of the second molar. And then it's like, oh, you know, then it's easy to fit. It's easy for  you to seat. So watch for that. And you might even need to ask the lab, hey, do me a favor,  please wrap the distal of the most distal tooth here.  [0:32:43]  I'd really appreciate that. And then you would then know, hey, yeah, this might be a little  tight. We might need to adjust it a little bit with a bur to get the line of jaw just right. But  that's going to be important. On the other hand, sometimes you can't because there's soft  tissue there. There's a third molar. Third molar goes and disappears into the gingiva. So  there's no way to wrap the distal. In that case, just make sure the patient knows that  there's this potential side effect that could occur. So you want them flossing every day and  if all of a sudden it goes snap, snap to slide, slide, then they need to call you. I call this  catching problems at microns instead of millimeters. If the patient is like, comes in on a six  month recall or something like that, it's like, hey, I'm catching food between my teeth down  here. Never done that before. That's millimeters. And that's going to require some ortho -  dontics to get those teeth to touch again. All right, next is jaw position changes. And this is  a little more complicated. We'll talk more about this in level two of the why these things  happen.  [0:33:43]  But in a nutshell, the main reason that people have bite changes is that we're holding their  jaw forward for six, seven, eight hours. They have never done that ever. Never, ever, ever.  They've never held their teeth together for six, seven, eight hours. Usually their jaw is re -  laxed now. Their jaw is still relaxed. With oral appliance therapy, hopefully they shouldn't  be having to help the appliance. Right. So if the appliance is doing its job, their jaw mus -  cles are completely relaxed. This is not a tightening of the lateral pterygoid that it can't be  stretched. I had someone ask me that question just literally in the last day or two with an  email. It's like, hey, I'm struggling with this concept. I'm thinking this and this and this. And  he actually used the analogy. He's like, yeah, I think it's the lateral pterygoid. And then  09/01/25   Page   of 11   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  we're kind of trying to stretch the lateral pterygoid. That'd be like someone with tight ham -  strings not being able to touch their toes. Okay, I get the tight hamstrings not being able to  touch my toes analogy because I have a hard time. Well, let's be real. I can't touch my  toes. One of my goals for years has been to touch my toes.  [0:34:47]  I think I have once or twice, but I'm just not a real flexible guy. Right. And I'm sure there's  lots of different reasons for that. But I was thinking about that literally this morning as I  woke up. I was thinking about this, and I woke up with my hands here. And I tend to sleep  with my hands up around here. Probably you do too. Probably. You don't sleep with your  arms like this, do you? Okay, is there any, any weirdos out there that sleep with their arms  completely stretched out like that? Probably not. So you're kind of like this, or you're bent  at the elbows, your knees are bent to a degree. You know what I've never noticed in my  entire life? I've never noticed that it's difficult to lengthen my arms in the morning because  they've been bent like this for six, seven, eight hours. I've never noticed that. It's like, oh,  wow, I really got a... I got to do some effort there to be able to put my arms straight. Okay?  And that's a heck of a lot bigger difference. Now, it's a lot bigger muscle than my lateral  pterygoid, but still, you get my analogy here?  [0:35:44]  I'm sleeping like this, relaxed in the morning. To do that is no problem. Same thing with  your lateral pterygoid. It's not about the lateral pterygoid. What I think it's about is fluid in  the joints. And that is why you can't close your condyle all the way in there. Because his -  torically, if they didn't have something between their teeth, they would have been able to  swallow. Well, they still swallow. But when I swallow at night. And according, if you re -  member, I showed you the 1969 study of, like, that's my 1% occlusion principle. So even  with 1% occlusion, you spent 1.3 minutes with your teeth in contact. About 10 times per  hour, you would swallow. Okay. That little bit of a swallow with tooth contact, that will kind  of express that fluid and out of that joint. Okay? Now, on the other hand, if I bring my jaw  forward and open, hold it for six, seven, eight hours, there's a lot more fluid that can get in  that joint. And I've not done anything to get it out during that six, seven, eight hours. So in  the morning, I take the appliance out, and my bite's all weird.  [0:36:53]  And then the key principle there is most people have no clue what their bite should feel  like, so they just don't worry about it. And unless they're a big salad eater, where they have  to get their teeth all the way together and grind their food, they won't even notice. They  can still bite on their front teeth, no problem. So they can still incise things easily. They can  still swallow because as long as you stabilize your mandible, you can swallow. This is why  people lose their bite. This is why people lose their bite. Nothing to the lateral pterygoid.  It's this initial thing. And then once they're there now it becomes a muscle engram. So our  teeth fit where they fit. Cause that's where they fit, right? And if I just kind of bring my jaw  into a new spot. And I just leave it there for a while. After a while, because I'm still able to  swallow and eat and do everything normal. My brain's like, well, I guess this is where our  09/01/25   Page   of 12   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  teeth come together now and then six, seven, eight hours a day. That is reinforced by this  thing that I wear that holds my jaw in that same position.  [0:37:50]  Does that make sense? Okay, I'll talk about that more later. But this is the reason for this  thing that I call the morning reprogrammer. And I'm going to give you kind of state of the  art knowledge on this now. So this would have been taught differently in the original  Spencer Study Club videos. So I probably would like to change this to the afternoon re -  programmer and I'll explain why. So I'll still call it the morning reprogrammer on these  slides. But think about not having your patient do this immediately in the morning. Okay?  Maybe it's the mid morning reprogrammer. Maybe it's the lunchtime reprogrammer. I don't  love the morning reprogrammer, which is based on what I just said. With the fluid in the  joint, if the person puts this thing in to jam their condyles up into that fossa to their habitual  occlusion, they could hurt themselves. Okay? You can't compress fluid. So if they try to do  this hard, that fluid is going to hurt them. Now that you may think that contradicts what I  said a second ago with the normal swallowing of the ten times an hour. No, it doesn't. Be -  cause that, that is completely different because you would just be like a touch and then  that's it.  [0:39:05]  And you do that 10 times per hour, you never have chance for there to be a great bunch of  fluid get into your joints. When we hold the jaw forward where there cannot be any of that  swallowing type of stuff for seven, eight hours. You understand? So when they swallow on  the appliance, they can't compress their joints at all. Okay? So at the start here, what I'm  going to tell you to do is you have the patient take the appliance out, go about their busi -  ness. Do not try to get their bite back together for a while. And a while could be a couple  hours. And then maybe right before they're going to eat lunch, then they put this in to use  this. Maybe you even teach the patient about intermittent fasting. You're like, hey, you  know what? Maybe we like just, unless you're a huge breakfast eater, maybe just don't do  breakfast anymore. And that's probably going to help you drop a couple pounds. And by  the way, I don't know if you know this or not, but if you drop a few pounds, like your tongue  is one of the areas where fat gets lost quicker. Your face and neck. You know, you may  have lost weight in the past. You know, you lose like five pounds or something. People like,  hey, have you lost weight? And you, your clothes fit the same and everything else, but your  face looks a little different. So losing a little bit of weight could make a big difference with  this. Maybe let's try that.  Morning Reprogrammer   [0:40:18]  And that would be a way to get them to do this morning reprogrammer later so that they're  not hurting themselves. Okay, back to how we make it though. So ThermAcryl Plus from  Airway Management, that's the tap company. So we have our armamentarium here of the  09/01/25   Page   of 13   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  ThermAcryl Plus, a tongue depressor and some shim stock. What the shim stock is for is  we are going to check for, for posterior occlusion prior to making the morning reprogram -  mer prior to making the oral appliance. So would it be a good idea for us to document that  this person does not have posterior occlusion before we've given them the oral appliance?  Think that might be a good idea? I agree, that'd be a good idea. So let's check with the  shim stock and any place that they're not holding shim stock, document it.  [0:41:03]  Okay, then how we make this. And some of you would have done this at a course with me.  We have boiling water here. We put that in the ThermAcryl beads, kind of gather up the  ThermAcryl beads. I kind of put it on the stick here just to make sure that they don't get on  the sides of the cup and stick to it. Put that back in the cup. We're looking for it to be ho -  mogeneous like that, like Silly Putty. Then we make it into the shape of a Jolly Rancher,  stick it on the lower teeth and then we just have the patient bite down onto it. You do not, I  repeat, you do not roll the material up onto the facials of the upper front teeth. You want it  to be perfect like this, where they just close down and you can perfectly see their teeth fit  perfectly into those indents that they just made. With it in their mouth setting up, we are  checking once again with shim stock to make gosh darn sure that they're still holding that  shim stock. This is one of the problems with the printed and the milled morning occlusal  guides or any type of occlusal guide that is made other than this way, I'm sure that we'll get  better at this.  [0:42:09]  But right now, even though printing and milling is very precise, it's exceedingly difficult to  make a device that lets the teeth come all the way together. So, you know, in Jack's case,  it's my son Jack, you don't really see a lot of holes on there, but for me, you do. If I do this,  you see holes. For most people, if you take the morning reprogrammer, put it up to the  light, you're going to see light through it. So it's exceedingly thin. With milled and printed,  it's hard to do that. Not impossible, but hard. So if you do get a morning occlusal guide, AM  Aligner, blah, blah, blah, from the company that you're working with, check it and check it  like this. Can they hold shim stock normally? Can they hold shim stock with whatever you  just got from the manufacturer? If they can't, that's not necessarily a deal breaker. The  morning occlusal guide or whatever you got from the manufacturer is assuredly bringing  them towards the right spot. Okay. It's just not going all the way there. That proprioception  is critically important. The that's where my bite is. That proprioception, that's the muscle  engram that you were taught.  [0:43:23]  That's my brain saying, this is where my teeth fit. Okay? Remember, my teeth fit here be -  cause an orthodontist put them there when I was 12 years old, not because God put them  there. So that's my bite as far as my brain is concerned. And if I don't go there, then I could  lose it because there's all sorts of different spots that I can bring my jaw. Okay? It's not that  I only can close there. I can close all over the place. So I want them to feel it. So if the  morning occlusal guide that you have does not allow them to hold shim stock, you need to  teach the patient what holding shim stock feels like. And I didn't put this in there. I should  09/01/25   Page   of 14   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  have. One of our Spencer Study Club members, Nancy Addy, past president of the Acad -  emy of Dental Sleep Medicine, she came up with a beautiful idea, which is she gets her  patients those little ribbons like by Post it, like Post it Note fame, those little colored plastic  things that you use to mark pages in a book, very inexpensive. She gives those to the pa -  tient and she has them use that as shim stock at home.  [0:44:23]  So instead of giving them the shim stock, it'd be tough to use with your fingers. She just  gives them these little thin pieces of plastic. They put that in there. Can they hold it? Can  they hold it? If they can't hold it all of a sudden, then that is the alert for them to contact her  to say, hey, I think my bite might be changing. Okay, that's the morning reprogrammer.  Make sure you give that again. I'll go over this in more detail in level two, but you give that  to every patient. Every patient should have a morning reprogrammer. A lot of your patients  won't need to use it. Their bite will come back together on its own, like mine does. Some of  your patients will need to use it every day to get their bite back. Some of your patients will  really struggle a lot to get their bite back. Predict the problems before they occur. The most  important one is a person with reducing disc displacement. Their jaw will have a desire to  stay in that correct anatomical position. All right, now, even if you do everything right,  you're going to have patients with bite changes.  [0:45:24]  So consent, educate and consent some more. Explain to the patients that you know what?  These side effects will most likely occur. Now, I know you're probably not used to that. I  know most dentists don't like telling patients, yeah, you're probably going to have this  problem. Physicians are really good at that, aren't they? Now they give us like 6 pages of  informed consent that always say, and you're probably going to die from getting these, you  know, stitches or whatever that, that'll kind of be in there. And they go over it really quick  and they just move on with their life. And then when bad stuff does happen, they're like,  oh, yeah, remember, you signed that consent. So as dentists, we don't like to do that. But I  want you in this case to be like, hey, you know what? We're treating your life threatening  sleep apnea. This is important treatment. It's possible that tooth movement, bite changes,  things like that could happen. Okay? It's actually likely that, that they'll happen because  we're going to be treating you now for the rest of your life. This isn't just a six month thing,  a one year thing. This is long term.  [0:46:24]  Then follow up with, you know what. If you do the stuff we told you to, though, if you floss  like a boss, check your bite every night, if you do these things that we're telling you to, it's  unlikely that serious side effects will occur. These side effects can be avoided. Reinforce  that at every follow up that you have. So just it's throughout this stage of records and fitting  the appliance and follow up with the appliance and then at your six month or annual re -  calls. If you're a regular, if you're a real dentist and you're seeing your patient just on six  month recalls like normal, then just reinforce it. Hey, how's it going with your appliance?  Oh, let's check your bite real quick. Let's check with the floss between your teeth. Hey,  looks like everything's doing awesome. You just keep watching for me, okay? You know,  09/01/25   Page   of 15   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  I'm only going to see you every six months, every year. You are the one that's checking  this every day for me, if any. Remember, if you can't hold the plastic between your teeth, if  this goes from snap, snap to slide, slide, you're going to give me a call.  [0:47:17]  Now nothing is free. There's side effects with almost every treatment and there's side ef -  fects with no treatment, like dyeing, for example. And quick story on that. I had a patient  when I was out in North Carolina and he's like, hey, could this oral appliance affect my pe -  riodontal disease? Could it negatively affect my periodontal disease? And I'm like, well,  yeah, possibly could. You know, we're going to be putting some forces on your teeth. This  is anchored to your teeth. It's keeping your lower jaw from falling backwards. You might put  on some weird forces at night that I can't predict. So, yeah, it could. And I said, however,  it's possible also that your periodontal disease is connected in some way with your ob -  structive sleep apnea. And treating the obstructive sleep apnea could actually improve  your periodontal disease. I don't know for sure, but it could improve it. It could make it  worse. It could do nothing. I know that's not a great answer for you, but that's the true an -  swer. And he decided not to treat his sleep apnea because he was concerned about his  periodontal disease. I like to joke that he had the world's greatest hygienists that had  scared him so much about his periodontal disease that he was not willing to take any risk.  [0:48:23]  So what is that patient willing to live with? Okay, let them make the decision. If they're like,  you know what? Yeah, I don't think I want to do this. I'm concerned that it could screw up  that implant that I spent $5,000 on or something like. Alright, I get it. And then say, hey, I'm  here for you down the road, if something changes. The something that might change may  not even be them, right? The something that might change might be that a friend of theirs  dies. And you know, they're talking to the surviving spouse who says, yeah, you know, he  had sleep apnea and he really ignored. And that patient's like, oh, you know, I have sleep  apnea that I'm ignoring. Maybe I should get back to my dentist. So it may not be an event  for them, it may be an event for someone else that triggers them to think, maybe, you  know, those veneers that I'm concerned about breaking off or something with the oral ap -  pliance, maybe I should be more concerned about my heart disease and having a stroke.  Dealing with Problems   [0:49:15]  So let me quickly talk about dealing with problems. I'll go into this in more detail in level  two, but in tooth movement, number one, adjust the appliance. Can we grab the distal of  that tooth? Is there any way that we can do that? Can we loosen up the material between  the embrasures on those teeth that are separating? Is there something like that we can  do? The Invisalign effect, if you've got their original scans or original models, maybe you  can make an aligner on those original scans and pull those teeth back. Orthodontic  movement, ultimately you might need to do, and I've had to do this with a few patients  09/01/25   Page   of 16   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  where the orthodontist will put some buttons on their teeth. They wear a power band be -  tween those buttons, pull those teeth back together, and then we adjust the appliance in  order to make sure we're over that distal of the most distal tooth. Make sure you have  good records, make sure you keep those scans, make sure you keep those models. If you  have models and you don't want to store them. A little trick that I've heard, I can't remem -  ber who first taught me this, but I think it's brilliant, is if you want to send the models home  with your patient, you tell them, hey, take these to your house. And in your master bath -  room, I want you to keep these under your sink in your master bathroom.  [0:50:35]  And the patient will be like, that's weird. And you're like, because if we ever need these,  I'm going to say, hey, they're under your sink in your master bathroom. And you know, how  often do you ever change anything under your sink in your master bathroom? Probably  never. So those could stay there for 15 years and undisturbed, or if you put them any -  where else in your house, very easily for them to be thrown away or something like that.  And they'll be like, cool. And then that's it. So all you got to do is remember that you tell  that to every single patient. Hey, we need you to bring your models in. What models? I  don't have models in my teeth. You know. What are you talking about? That was eight  years ago. I understand. Go look at under the sink in your master bath, and those models  should be under there. And then the patient's like, I'll be darn sure, enough, here they are.  Okay. Or you keep them yourself or you keep the scans. And I've heard some people like,  oh, that's a lot of data. Whatever, dude. Just keep the freaking scans. Okay? So this has  bailed me out so many times over my life.  [0:51:30]  And again, we had, like, models, you know, stone models that we would keep. We'd keep  them. Keep them forever. And why I did that is because people would come in and be like,  hey, I think my teeth are crooked now, or something like that. And all I would do is get their  models. And I was blessed to have a very big office. We had space for this stuff. But we  would take their models, I'd bring in their models. I would hand them, literally, their lower  model if they said their lower teeth are crooked, say, hey, check this out. Here's the, re -  member we took a bite record when we first saw you? Theoretically, if your teeth have  moved, this thing won't fit on your teeth anymore. Here, let me put that on your teeth really  quick. Put it on their teeth. I hand them a mirror. I hand them the model and go, hey, I  apologize. I need to go take a call really quick. I'll be right back. And then I disappear, and I  let them be alone with their records for, like, five minutes. And they're seeing that. Well,  yeah, that blue thing fits perfectly.  [0:52:23]  Yep. Sure enough, my teeth were crooked before. And when I come back in the room, they  say, oh, I never realized that my teeth were that crooked before. I guess maybe it's just I'm  noticing them because I'm, you know, looking at them more closely, like, oh, yeah, well,  we've had a lot of people say that. Like, I've never had to debate with the patient that it  wasn't, that there was or wasn't movement. I just let them come to that conclusion. You  can do the same thing with the saving the scans, you know, maybe even better, frankly,  09/01/25   Page   of 17   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  because you could just bring the scans, put them up on the computer, make them this big,  so just bigger than life and be like, hey, check those out. Kind of look at them a little bit.  You can spin it around there, look at your teeth. And I'll be back in a minute. And probably  they're going to come back and go, yeah, that looks the same to me. Jaw position  changes. Step one, morning reprogrammer on models. No appliance at night. So this is  another error that people make. It'd be like, hey, Jamison, so they did have a bite change,  or I've got some patient, they moved to my area and, and they've had a bite change.  [0:53:24]  What do I do? And I'd be like, well, you use like a leaf gauge. Use it. Make a morning re -  programmer on models, stuff like that. And they'll then not have the patient go without their  appliance. Okay, well, what do you think is going to happen if you're doing a 15, 20, let's,  let's go crazy, say 30 minutes a day, the patient's using the morning reprogrammer exer -  cise, trying to get their jaw back. But six, seven, eight hours a day, they're holding the jaw  forward. There's no way that that exercise is going to reverse the 6, 7, 8 hours. So if you  want to get their bite back, they need to go without their appliance for a while. Now, most  of these bite changes are minor, insignificant. Patient couldn't care less and don't worry  about it. Some are positive and then you might want to deal with it. This is again why we  educate the patient in advance because if their bite comes into, if their jaw comes into a  better position, better. So where would it be better? Well, that reducing disc displacement  patient. So now they're on the disc and they weren't before that person.  [0:54:27]  There may be an indication there to do some orthodontics, pull their teeth together, do  some crowns if that's indicated to bring them into a better jaw position, into actual centric  relation, you better have talked about that in advance because if they have a 25, $30,000  thing or $6,000 of ortho and they weren't expecting that, they're probably not going to be  too happy about it. But if you have explained it correctly, then that will make more sense to  them. Now, sometimes these are significant and sometimes you have to consider surgery.  To put that in perspective, though, in 20,000 plus patients, one that we've had, that had  that Le Fort I told you about, the guy from Texas. That's it. So so this is not going to be  something that's going to be on a regular basis that you have to do surgery. I know there's  some people that are more pro surgery and they may consider orthognathic surgery or  marpi or things like that. That's okay again, as long as you are giving the patient all of the  potential options in those cases.  Avoid, Diagnose, Treat and Manage TMD Associated with OAT.   [0:55:33]  All right, Never give up. To avoid, diagnose, treat and manage TMD associated with oral  appliance therapy. Educate yourself, know how to perform a good evaluation, follow up  with your patients regularly. And lastly, practice, practice, practice, and don't give up. You  can help these people. The TMD is really kind of the fun part. I know that you might be get -  09/01/25   Page   of 18   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  ting into this just because the sleep stuff is what's exciting to you and the TMD is like, oh  my gosh. Yeah, I don't even, I have no clue about that. As I've said before, dental sleep  medicine is easy as long as you're an expert in TMD. Once you get this TMD stuff down, it  makes all of it more fun, frankly, and more predictable and less scary because you'll un -  derstand what's going on with the jaw a lot better.  Oral Appliance Therapy Protocol   [0:56:16]  All right, so last up here, our oral appliance therapy protocol in level two, we're going to go  through from initial screening to final follow up. And here is kind of that protocol on a slide  here. Screen refer patients to an MD for evaluation. Remember, we're not referring for  sleep studies. We're just referring for should they get a sleep study or not. So it's just an  evaluation. The MD will then refer the patient for a sleep study.  [0:56:40]  Maybe a home study, probably if the insurance requires it. Maybe in a lab. If the patient  has sleep apnea and the physician thinks oral appliance therapy is indicated, then they  refer them to back to you. You do your exam, get your records, fit the appliance follow up  visits for comfort and efficacy. Once the patient is snoring less and feeling better, you refer  back to the physician for consideration of follow up PSG, ideally with titration of the appli -  ance in the sleep lab. Quick story on that again, we'll cover this more in level two, but just  this. A couple days ago, I had one of our Spencer Study Club members, Kip Covington,  reach out to me, said, hey, I was giving a presentation, a grand rounds type of presenta -  tion to the sleep medicine community here locally and we were talking about finding the  right position for oral appliances and titration. He said, and one of the Sleep techs kind of  raised her hand and said, hey, why don't you just adjust? Why don't we just adjust the oral  appliances, live in the sleep lab like I used to do at the place I used to work.  [0:57:44]  And Kip said, you didn't happen to come from Idaho, did you? And she's like, yeah, how'd  you know that? And he's like, well, because that means you worked with Jamison Spencer  and Cameron Kuehne because they're the ones that titrate live in the sleep lab. And she's  like, well, yep, that is who I worked with. And that was cool. Because she's like, yeah, I  mean that, that makes all the sense in the world. Why wouldn't you do this? Now most  sleep labs aren't going to do it this way, even though it's the best way. And I'll make a big  case for that. But you should be aware of that and try to encourage them to do this. Serial  HSTS is better than nothing. But in lab, adjusting the appliance, live in the sleep lab, defi -  nitely the gold standard as far as I'm concerned. Then once you have done whatever fol -  low up sleep study you're going to do based on the physician deciding whether they do it  or not again, sometimes even sleep doctors will be like, no, it sounds like they're doing  okay to me. We're fine. Alter the appliance for long term success, meaning kind of those  final, final adjustments, whatnot, and then long term follow up.  09/01/25   Page   of 19   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  [0:58:48]  Usually we replace the appliance every three to five years. I think that might be changing a  little bit as we move into printing these appliances in house. I see a day coming in the near  future where we will give patients new appliances much more regularly. I think annually will  become just kind of normal if we're printing the appliance and maybe literally as frequently  as every few months, maybe even every month with kind of a fresh appliance that's going  to make sure that their teeth never move. If we can print these at a really, really low cost,  that kind of makes sense because these materials, unfortunately one of the problems with  the printed materials is they get a little yucky looking quicker because they're more porous.  But who cares if they're only going to wear it for a month or two months. Okay, so I think  that's where we're headed. But as of you know, right now, when I'm recording these  videos, this is our standard protocol. All right, to wrap up this section, we're going to watch  this little excerpt from show called the Doctors. And this is, you know, we've talked a little  bit about TMD stuff.  [0:59:54]  The basics of TMD. We've talked about sleep apnea now. And this kind of puts these  things together. So this woman was on this episode of the Doctors as a example of some -  one getting Botox for their TMJ problem. And that's what this episode or this excerpt on  this episode is about, is treating TMJ problems with Botox. And I want you to see if the  doctors maybe missed something in this patient's history.  [video playback]  Host:   Do you have a recurring headache, maybe jaw pain, or hear clicking sounds when  you take a bite of food? If you do, you may have a disorder called TMJ. And here to fill us  in on a possible solution is cosmetic surgeon Dr. Alex Rivkin, as well as Suzanne. And  Suzanne suffers from TMJ. Welcome to you both.  Dr. Alex Rivkin:   Thank you  Suzanne:   Thank you.  Host:   Hello. Welcome back.  Dr. Alex Rivkin:   Thanks.  Doctor 2:   You know, and TMJ is an acute or chronic inflammation of your temporo -  mandibular joint is such a common problem. Over 35 million people have this condition.  Second leading cause of musculoskeletal problems secondary to back pain.  Dr. Alex Rivkin:   Yeah, it's of 75% of people in the United States at some point in their  lives are gonna have symptoms of this syndrome.  09/01/25   Page   of 20   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  Doctor 2:   I want you to take a look to see what goes on with TMJ problems. And for a lot  of people, it starts with grinding of the teeth. It's the use of that muscle, that masseter  muscle, that has an effect on our jaw joint to cause difficulty opening your mouth, chewing,  and pain. So what kind of symptoms were you having, Suzanne?  Suzanne:   Well, I do a lot of clenching and thrusting of my jaw to breathe because I have  sleep apnea, so. So for me, it just manifests in, like, throbbing pain right along here. I can't  sleep. I wake up completely. Like, I haven't slept at all. An intense pain, like, it just radiates  from right through this area up right to the temples and right the back of my neck. Every -  thing gets pulled out of whack, and it's just…  Doctor 2:   A pretty debilitating condition.  Suzanne:   It's very debilitating.  Doctor 2:   What kind of things did you try to make yourself feel better?  Suzanne:   How long is the show? I've tried everything from acupuncture, antidepressants,  chiropractic, where they stick their fingers in your mouth and pull. I've done night guards  with the dentist. I had my wisdom teeth pulled. I've had my sinuses cleaned out because  they thought that might help with the breathing.  Dr. Alex Rivkin:   So a lot of the conventional TMJ treatments that we hear so much about.  Suzanne:   Right.  Speaker 2:   So, Dr. Rivkin, we've heard of Botox for wrinkles, for sweating, and we're hear -  ing about more and more uses, but now you're using it for TMJ. How does this work?  [end of video playback]  [1:02:41]  Dr. Jamison Spencer:   Did the illustrious doctors miss anything? They sure did, huh? The  first words out of her mouth were, I do a lot of clenching and thrusting of my jaw to breathe  because I have sleep apnea. You'll have to watch this again to notice this, but I have seen  this video probably 500 times at this point, because I use this when I lecture to make this  point that I'm making right now. Something I just barely noticed on, you know, listening 500  and the third time is when she says, so he's asked her, the one doctor has asked her what  symptoms you have. And after she's like, makes a joke, like, how long's the show? She  says, I do a lot of clenching and thrusting in my jaw to breathe because I have sleep ap -  nea. And he goes, uh-huh, okay. Like acknowledging what you just said and saying it kind  of like, yeah, you know, yeah, right, uh-huh. That kind of really ticks me off because it  09/01/25   Page   of 21   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  shows that he wasn't even listening to her. Because you would not think uh-huh with I do a  lot of clenching the thrust of my jaw to breathe because I have sleep apnea.  [1:04:01]  Because in a moment she's going to get a bunch of Botox stuck in her masseters. Is para -  lyzing the muscles that you use to clench and thrust your jaw to breathe. Does that make  sense to you? Of course not. If I pointed this out to these three doctors, would it make  sense to them? Of course not. Now, they may disagree with me, but I think if they wit -  nessed, if they watch this video, all three of them would be like, you're right. Why did we  miss that on her? Because what's missing over here in the treatments? There's nothing  about CPAP. She says, I had sinus surgery because they thought it might help with the  brain breathing. No, they didn't. No one's ever had sinus surgery for their sleep apnea.  That's not a thing. They don't follow up on the sleep apnea. Just the next thing that hap -  pens is she gets a bunch of Botox. And is this the first time that she's gotten Botox injec -  tions? Of course not. Rivkin wouldn't have been that dumb to bring her on the show be -  cause he doesn't know how she's going to react. You know, like, she might, like, freak out  or scream or pass out.  [1:05:13]  So he's only going to bring someone on the show who he knows is going to be a good pa -  tient, who he knows is going to present well, looks nice for the camera, you know, is going  to speak well, that's Suzanne. And the reason they don't even hear her history is because  she looks like this. She is a thin, middle aged woman. She is not a fat older man. If she  was a fat older man, they would have picked up on it. If one of these guys here was on the  show instead. And they said, hey, Bubba. Sure his name is not Bubba, but hey, Bubba,  what symptoms were you having? Well, how long's your show? Right? And then they say,  well, I clench and thrust my jaw to breathe because I have sleep apnea. I'm pretty sure  that the other two doctors there, you know, not the guy ready to do Botox, but the other  two would have looked at each other and been like, sleep apnea. I thought we were doing  a thing on TMJ. And then they would have said, what treatments have you tried? And then  Bubba goes through all the different treatments, never says diddly about CPAP.  [1:06:32]  I think those two doctors would have been like, so just to back up a little bit, Bubba, you  said that you have sleep apnea. You're on CPAP, right? I mean, obviously you're on CPAP.  And then Bubba says, no, no CPAC. I can't use a CPAC. My dad called it CPAC as well.  So you get it? Like this sucks. So there are so many dentists that are being taught like  there's a course out there, still exists, drives me crazy. And it's like Frontline TMJ therapy  and it's Botox. Bull crap. So there is no one I can say this definitively. And I said this before  in the TMD part. There has never been a patient in the history of the world who has a TMJ  problem due to a Botox deficiency. Okay? Does not exist. So you now are going to be in  the top 1% of the top 1%, probably of dentists in the world that even understand these  things, but that are going to connect that sleep apnea and TMJ problems often go togeth -  er. And if we treat the sleep apnea, the TMJ problem gets better. And if we understand how  09/01/25   Page   of 22   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  TMJ problems work and we treat the sleep apnea, we can avoid any potential TMJ type of  side effects. Okay?  [1:07:46]  So good for you for getting through this foundational level one. I'm proud of you. Good job.  You're just getting started. This is the foundation in the next levels. We're going to go into  the little intricacies, the little nuances, the step by step approaches of helping people with  all of these problems. And remember, this is kind of where we start here. The patient that  looks like this is going to be the one that is never going to be caught by our medical doc -  tors. She goes in and says she's tired and not having, not sleeping well and just doesn't  have energy like she used to. She's getting Prozac. There are people in your community  that you can help in ways that no one else can because they won't get picked up. There's  people on your staff that you should start with immediately. Start there. If you're just barely  getting started in dental sleep medicine, talk to your staff, show them these videos. Re -  member, they get access to these videos too. So five staff members can have full access  to this, keeping track of all the videos they've watched and all the stuff that you have ac -  cess to.5 people at no additional charge.  [1:08:52]  If you need more than that, let us know. We're probably not going to charge for that either,  but they can go through this. You're going to find out that they have problems, that their  spouse has a problem, that their kid has a problem, that their dad has a problem, that their  mom has a problem. You're going to find this out. Start there. Get a bunch of reps in, treat  a bunch of people. Learn. And most importantly, start with yourself. If you have not already  gotten an oral appliance for yourself, please do. If not for the least reason of just trying  them so that you can communicate to your patient, you might try it thinking, I don't think I  have a problem, and then find out that you do have a problem. And it could be like it did  with me. So when I was early on in this field, this long time ago, and I don't think I had  sleep apnea, but I was wearing an oral appliance just to see what it was like. And then I  stopped after a week or two of just kind of, you know, just experimenting with it. And I no -  ticed at work in the afternoon, I'd be kind of like, you know, kind of tired.  Dental Sleep Medicine (Getting Started Saving Lives)   [1:09:51]  And it's like, what's different? I haven't been wearing my oral appliance and I went back to  wearing my oral appliance and I didn't feel fatigued in the afternoon anymore. I wasn't  snoring, did not have express sleep apnea at that time. And it still helped. So treat your -  self, take your scans, send them to Glidewell, get yourself an appliance three days later,  get started helping yourself. Okay, well, that is us getting started saving lives. The ripple  effects of this level are going to go out for eternity. You'll never understand the impact that  you have on people. This is the foundation we're going to build on this foundation. I hope  maybe from time to time you come back to this, reinforce these principles in your head.  09/01/25   Page   of 23   24

SSC 2.0 - 116: Oral Appliance Therapy Side Effects  What you know now, though, in these hours and hours that you've spent in on this founda -  tion, you understand more about this than virtually any dentist in the world, unless you're a  member of Spencer Study Club, and virtually any physician. So only sleep doctors will  know more about sleep than you do now. And again, we're gonna... This is the foundation.  We'll go even deeper. Most dentists are not gonna know anything that you kind of covered  here.  [1:11:03]  So don't be surprised when you go out and they don't know these things. It's not common  knowledge. What I taught you here. You may have even seen me give these lectures be -  fore in person, but I would have done it in a fraction of the time. So to go into the detail that  I have here, I can't do on a normal regular course. I have to go super fast and cut out a  bunch of stuff. You also are in the mentoring group now. So you go into the mentoring  group, you ask the questions. You go into the mentoring group and just search for answers  to questions that have been asked over the past years. Okay? That's been there a long  time. You've got the resources now. You've got the foundational knowledge. Don't wait.  Start treating people. Okay, take care.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 24   24

