SSC 2.0 - 513: GLP-1 Agonists for OSA?  SSC 2.0   Level 5  513: GLP-1 Agonists for OSA?  [intro music]  GLP-1 Agonist (Ozempic Face)   [0:00:12]  Okay, now let's move on to Ozempic face. Let's move on to our GLP-1 agonist. Ozempic  face is probably something you've heard about, and this is people that lose weight really  fast, and they lose a lot of fat in their face, and it's not necessarily that great-looking. I was  at a conference relatively recently, and you can pick out folks that are on Ozempic, and  partly that was because I knew them, and I knew them when they were more full, a little  chubbier, and now all of a sudden they're very hollowed appearance, as it says here, and it  was not like, oh, all right, so you've taken up running or something. It was pretty obvious  that they were on this medication. Now, if you've gotten to this point in Spencer Study  Club, if you're going through the levels one at a time, and you watched also the sleep and  drugs module, you know that I'm not a drug guy. I am pretty anti-drug. Knock on wood, I  don't take any medications myself. Jenny's not on any prescription medications, both in  our 50s.  [0:01:32]  My kids aren't on any prescription medications. I'm not a drug guy. That does not tend to  be in my paradigm of the first place that I look, and it's not for a lot of people, but for some  people it is, and if there is a magic pill that can work, then great. Something I say all the  time and do this with you right now, do you have patients, so let's say you've been doing  this for a while, do you have patients that love their oral appliance? Okay, you probably  said yes, and I would say to you, that's not true. I would say that 99.999% of the patients  I've treated over the years and that my practices have treated over the years don't love  their oral appliance. They love the outcome of using their oral appliance. Okay, now you  may say, “well, that's splitting hairs, Jamison” but it's not because they want the outcome.  Nobody is like, "oh man, I can't wait to put in that oral appliance”, right? You don't have any  patient, I promise you, that is like going home at 5 o'clock from work and pops in their oral  appliance just because they love wearing it so much. They sneak it into the office and pop  it in a couple hours a day.  [0:02:57]  They just love it so much. No, they love the outcome of using their oral appliance. So if a  drug was developed that I could give you this pill and it would open your airway, it would  protect your airway, your airway would not be collapsible anymore, and there was zero  side effects, zero, would you use it? Yeah. Why wouldn't you? Okay, so that's my point.  Now, the GLP-1s is not that. However, and we don't have this in here because this will be  09/01/25   Page   of 1   6

SSC 2.0 - 513: GLP-1 Agonists for OSA?  the monthly Zoom meeting type stuff when this comes about, but right now, I just men -  tioned a drug that could keep your airway from collapsing. That's in the works. Already in  animal trials. I think maybe even human trials have started in some countries, but there is  a pill that will make it so that the oropharyngeal airway becomes far harder to collapse.  The odds of that having no other side effects seems slim to me, but nevertheless, that is  out there. Again, for me, I would probably rather wear an oral appliance than take a drug if  that drug had other systemic effects, which it probably is, right? But there's a lot of people  that prefer a drug therapy.  [0:04:22]  So this is really important for you to understand because patients are being marketed to.  You know, the whole ask your doctor about. That very effective marketing. And when pa -  tients are like, well, geez, why would I do that oral appliance? And then you go all lawyer  on them and spend, do three-page informed consent that they're basically going to die and  their bite's going to change and I need $10,000 of ortho and probably all their teeth  crowned and probably lose all their teeth. You know, you go hardcore on the informed  consent. They're like, okay, why am I doing this? Why don't I just take a pill? So under -  standing this is important just to understand the zeitgeist of patients in general and them  wanting a quick fix if it's available. But then also, not to be negative about this, the positive  aspect of GLP-1s and medications that are like it and that will come from here that'll be  similar in helping people lose weight. Because that is why this is connected to obstructive  sleep apnea, is obstructive sleep apnea is associated with obesity and GLP-1s can help  people lose a lot of weight. And we know from years and years and years that if people  can lose 10% of their body mass, that usually reduces their apnea-hypopnea index by  about 50% with a 10% weight loss.  GLP-1 in Treatment of OSA   [0:05:50]  So GLP-1s, glucagon-like peptide 1 agonists in the treatment of OSA, so to go through this  infographic here, so the metabolic effects of the GLP-1 agonists decrease weight, increase  insulin secretion and sensitivity, so they become more insulin sensitive, decrease glucagon  production, decrease gastric emptying, increase postprandial lipids. Now on that de -  creased gastric emptying, that means the food stays in your stomach longer, so you feel  full longer. So people that are on these medications will tell you that they don't feel hungry.  I won't go through all of these individually, you can pause and go through those, but here's  the cardiovascular effects, neurological effects, and then anti-inflammatory effects. So a lot  of real positive effects with these medications. Down here with the obstructive sleep apnea  syndrome, so not just about the weight loss, we have stabilized breathing patterns, in -  creased tone of upper airway muscles, and then decreased AHI, decreased excessive  daytime sleepiness, decreased BMI being of course the big one there. This infographic  comes from this 2024 paper, a narrative review of the GLP-1 agonists.  09/01/25   Page   of 2   6

SSC 2.0 - 513: GLP-1 Agonists for OSA?  GLP-1 Studies   [0:07:05]  This 2025 paper of doing a systematic review and meta-analysis looking at placebo-con -  trolled trials. Authors state GLP-1 receptor agonists significantly reduce the apnea-hypop -  nea index, improving the severity of obstructive sleep apnea in individuals with elevated  body weight. GLP-1RAs present a promising alternative to continuous positive airway  pressure. While effective in reducing OSA severity, GLP-1RAs are associated with an in -  creased risk of gastrointestinal side effects.  [0:07:34]  Another review paper from 2024, the study showed that GLP-1 RA treatment had positive  effects. Furthermore, GLP-1RAs were shown to have beneficial outcomes as an adjunct  therapeutic alongside CPAP. So this is nice that you could put someone on CPAP immedi -  ately to protect their airway, treat their sleep apnea, put them on a GLP-1, help them with  weight loss, so using these in combination. Is that restricted only to CPAP? Of course not.  Again, people that are more obese are more likely to be directed towards CPAP, but are  there plenty of obese people out there that can't tolerate CPAP? You bet there are. So us -  ing GLP-1s in conjunction with oral appliance therapy, I think is going to be something that  becomes more common.  [0:08:23]  Again, in our practice, it's unlikely that we would be the ones managing those medications.  We would have the sleep doctor or the patient's primary care doctor do that. Last two  statements here in this article. However, the additive improvements of AHI in combination  with the GLP-1RAs and CPAP strategies in comparison with CPAP treatment alone are  contentious. Specifically, GLP-1RA interventions are significantly less effective compared  to CPAP treatment. The current gold standard management for OSA. So there is still a little  bit of a battle here of like, well, what's better? And this is getting to the point of patient de -  sires, right? So remember that in our evidence-based medicine Venn diagram, we have  the literature, we have the doctor's experience and expertise, and we have what the pa -  tient wants. And what the patient wants is a pill versus a machine. That is for darn sure. So  there is a contention here, a tension in what is the patient want, what they're willing to do  versus what is maybe best. So the best treatment is the one the patient will actually do.  And if they will only do the GLP-1s and that will help them lose weight and that will help  them with their sleep apnea, okay, cool.   Maybe that's the best treatment for them, even  though that may not be the best treatment for reducing their AHI, reducing their symptoms.  [0:09:48]  Now, these authors go on to say though, that the evidence isn't that great so far. So kind  shifting down here, despite these sentiments, our scoping review has only identified nine  studies of low quality evidence with poor consensus in confirming that GLP-1 RAs improve  obstructive sleep apnea syndrome outcomes in patients. So as of 2024, wasn't looking like  09/01/25   Page   of 3   6

SSC 2.0 - 513: GLP-1 Agonists for OSA?  these were really great. Nevertheless, FDA approved them for obstructive sleep apnea. So  not as a, I'm giving you this medication to help you lose weight, but literally if someone is  diagnosed with obstructive sleep apnea, GLP-1s now are cleared for the treatment of that.  Drug Efficacy Studies   [0:10:34]  And here that is in a 2025 paper Reading from this, several drugs demonstrate efficacy,  though none is sufficient to cure the disease as a monotherapy, and state the main poten -  tial lies in applying drug therapy in specific subgroups or as an addition to established  treatments like positive airway pressure or appliance therapy. Love that the authors threw  in oral appliance therapy on that. Glucagon-like peptide, glucose-dependent insulinotropic  polypeptide receptor agonist may be particularly beneficial in obese OSA patients.  [0:11:04]  As a major breakthrough, Tirzepatide, a GIP analog and GLP-1 receptor agonist, has be -  come the first FDA-approved and EMA-sanctioned pharmacological treatment option for  OSA in obese individuals. Beyond this, alerting drugs could help manage residual daytime  sleepiness and improve daytime functioning. The authors, I'm sure, by adding that last  sentence, they didn't mean how I'm going to interpret that right here. But, so, bottom line,  as of 2025, Tirzepatide is FDA-approved for the treatment of obstructive sleep apnea in  obese individuals. So if you're an obese individual and you have an option between CPAP  and Tirzepatide, what do you probably take? Well, and I don't mean you specifically, but in  general, in the general public, what do you think they're going to pick? The pill or the  mask? I think they're going to take the pill, right? And then, again, the part that the authors  probably don't mean to imply here is what if they aren't feeling that much better? Well, then  maybe they get put on speed for the day. Pill for losing weight, pill to make you feel a little  bit more peppy. Okay? Not uncommon. Does that make me upset or anything? No. Just it  is what it is, right?  [0:12:32]  So important for us to understand the perception of our patients. And once again, some -  thing I see missed all the time, evidence-based medicine Venn diagram includes what the  patient wants. So if that's what the patient will do, maybe it'll change, right? So you can't  just say, oh, well, the person just wants a pill. They just want the easy way out. Well, yeah,  you know, don't we all want the easy way out? But is it possible that you do that, they lose  10 or 15 pounds, and they completely change their identity? You know, next thing you  know, you see them back in your office in a year or two, and they're triathletes. You know,  they just completed a half Ironman or something. That happens all the time. So I, while I'm  not a drug guy, do I think there are places for medications to help people get over a hump,  get some momentum, get some help to where they can then finally get over that inertia  that so often just stops them, right? You know, most of us have been there. You probably  have maybe needed to lose some weight at some point or another.  09/01/25   Page   of 4   6

SSC 2.0 - 513: GLP-1 Agonists for OSA?  [0:13:55]  And we all know that sometimes that's pretty tough and that you can lose motivation pretty  quick. And if you don't see stuff changing, you lose motivation very quickly. But if you do,  then that's motivating, yes? So if you start a new diet, and this happens all the time with  almost any shift that we have with our diet, if you go vegan, if you go carnivore, if you go  whatever, you're going to see a bump pretty fast because you just changed how you're do -  ing things. And there will usually be a caloric deficit and stuff like that. But you lose that five  pounds in two weeks, and you're like, whoa, okay, cool, I'm on to something here. And  then it depends on how easy is it for you to continue this lifestyle. Well, adding a little drug  to your life is pretty easy lifestyle-wise. So where these things will fail for people is if they  do have those gastrointestinal problems, and some can be very, very, very severe with a  loss of motility in the stomach and things like that. Thankfully, those are at least currently  reported as relatively rare. And there's other ways to do this too, by the way. So you don't  have to do  [0:15:14]  I know some people that are having compounding pharmacies do these peptides for them,  and peptides are becoming a really big deal. And these are not seen in the same way as  some of these other mainstream drugs, I guess. So peptides are a different classification,  and I see a lot of hope for peptides. As a matter of fact, we are currently, as I'm recording  this, developing peptide creams for people with pain, with jaw pain and whatnot. Now, I do  tend, as an anti-drug guy, I tend to be more open to topicals and things like that. Those  things make a little bit more sense to me. But the bottom line is if we can have things that  help people get over that hump, get over that edge, have some initial momentum, I think  that's real positive.  [0:16:06]  And one last study, 2025 on Tirzepatide. So just to read here from the author's statements,  GLP-1 RAs, primarily Liraglutide and Tirzepatide, demonstrated efficacy in reducing AHI,  accompanied by an observed decrease in body weight, blood glucose, blood pressure, in -  flammatory factors. Tirzepatide demonstrated superior AHI reduction and weight loss com -  pared to Liraglutide. However, both injections increase the risk of gastrointestinal disor -  ders, and the risk of Tirzepatide is greater than that of Liraglutide. In consideration of the  enhanced metabolic parameters observed with GLP-1RAs, they may be recommended as  useful hypoglycemic medication for the management of type 2 diabetes with OSA.  [0:16:53]  So once again, just to conclude here, I think that it's great that we have medications that  can help people in this way. Even as a somewhat anti-medication guy, I do absolutely see  a need for this. Recently, I was speaking in Kentucky, and not to bash on Kentucky or any -  thing like that, but oh my gosh, was the obesity in the area that I was in. I had a rental car  and I drove around, went to different restaurants and stuff, but I'm talking 50% of the peo -  ple that I saw were obese to morbidly obese. And again, that's not trying to bash on Louis -  ville, Kentucky or something. We got a problem in the whole world, and the United States  09/01/25   Page   of 5   6

SSC 2.0 - 513: GLP-1 Agonists for OSA?  is not the most obese in the world. A lot of the island nations are massively obese, and this  is a massive problem.  [0:17:54]  And of course, a pill is not the answer. The answers are deeper and harder and more  complex. But to get that initial weight loss, to do this, everyone that I know that is also anti-  drug in general is pro people losing weight. And if this is something that will help people do  that and help them get on a pathway to health, I'm all for it. Okay, you need to be aware of  this though, because you're going to have patients be like, well, couldn't I just take a pill?  And then yeah, you can talk to them about that. And also, I absolutely believe that in the  future, we will see it be much more common for a sleep doctor to be like, all right, well,  you've got moderate sleep apnea, but you're 30 pounds overweight. So tell you what, you  could do the mask, but another option, I could put you on this medication. We get you the  oral appliance. As you're losing the weight, the oral appliance is going to become more ef -  fective probably, and that's all you're going to need. Who knows? Maybe you lose enough  weight and stuff, you don't even need any of this anymore.  [0:18:56]  What do you think? I think you're going to start seeing that more and more, this combina -  tion therapy, which is great. This just means less failures for us, more people we can help,  more people coming in, more people getting healthy, and the ripple effects of that going on  forever. Okay, hope you enjoyed that. Hope that helped you a little bit and stay tuned in  our monthly Zoom meetings for updates as these things occur.  [outro music]  09/01/25   Page   of 6   6

